<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"/>
<title>Galactic North</title>
<link href="reyn_9780441016006_oeb_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/adobe-page-template+xml"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:60eaa905-6e96-4a49-89d3-db4cba8c398a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<p><a id="c05"/></p>
<div class="ct"><b>DILATION SLEEP</b></div>
<div class="tx1">Spacers tell people that the worst aspect of starflight is revival. They speak the truth, I think. They give us dreams while the machines warm us up and map our bodies for cell damage. We feel no anxiety or fear, detached from our physical selves and adrift in generated fantasies.</div>
<div class="tx">In my dream I was joined by the cybernetic imago of Katia, my wife. We found ourselves within a computer-constructed sensorium. An insect, I felt my six thin legs propelling me into a wide and busy chamber. Four worker ants were there, crouched in stiff mechanical postures. With compound vision I studied these new companions, observing the nearest of them deposit a pearly egg from its abdomen. A novel visceral sense told me that I, too, contained a ready egg.</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re gods amongst them,” I told my wife’s imago.</div>
<div class="tx">“We are <i>Myrmecia gulosa</i>,” she whispered into my brain. “The bulldog ant. You see the queen, and her winged male?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yes.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Those maggoty things in the corner of the cell are the queen’s larvae. Her worker is about to feed them.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Feed them with what?”</div>
<div class="tx">“His egg, my darling.”</div>
<div class="tx">I rotated my sleek, mandibled head. “And will I also?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Naturally! A worker’s duty is always to serve his queen. Of course . . . you may exit this environ, if you choose. But you’ll have to remain in reefersleep for another three hours.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Three hours . . . might as well be centuries,” I said. “Then change it. Something a bit less alien.”</div>
<div class="tx">My imago dissolved the scenario, the universe. I floated in white limbo, awaiting fresh sensory stimulus. Soon I found myself brushing shimmering vermilion coral with eight suckered arms, an octopus.</div>
<div class="tx">Katia liked to play games.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">Eventually the dreams ceased and I suddenly sensed my body, cold and stiff but definitely anchored to my mind.</div>
<div class="tx">I allowed myself a long primal scream, then opened my eyes. The eyes I opened were the eyes of Uri Andrei Sagdev, who was once a mainbrain technician at the Sylveste Institute but who now found himself in the odd role of Starship Heuristic Resource, a crewperson.</div>
<div class="tx">Under different circumstances, it is not a role I would otherwise have chosen. I was alone, the room cold and silent. My five companions remained in reefersleep around my own capsule; only I had been revived. I sensed, then, that something must be wrong. But I did not query Katia, preferring to remain in ignorance until she saw fit to enlighten me regarding our situation.</div>
<div class="tx">I hauled myself from the open reefer and took falterng steps out of the room.</div>
<div class="tx">It was several minutes before I felt confident to do anything more ambitious than that. I stumbled to the nearby health bay and exercised with galvanic activators, pushing my muscles beyond the false limits of apparent exhaustion. Then I showered and dressed, taking the expediency of wearing a thermal layer beneath my overalls. Breakfast consisted of fried ham and Edam slices, followed by garlic croissants, washed down with chilled passion fruit and lemon tea.</div>
<div class="tx">Why was I not concerned to discover our difficulty?  Simply because the mere fact of revival told me that it could not be compellingly urgent. Any undesirable situation upon a light-skimming starship that does not instantly destroy it—probably in a flash of exotic bosons—will act on such an extended timescale that the mainbrain-crew overmind will have days or weeks to engineer a solution.</div>
<div class="tx">I knew we were not home, and that therefore something was wrong. But for a moment it was good simply to lie back in the kitchen and allow the music of Roedelius to envelop me, and to revel in this condition called life. To simply suck air into my old lungs.</div>
<div class="tx">I who had been dead, or near death, for so long.</div>
<div class="tx">“Some more, Uri?” asked my wife’s imago.</div>
<div class="tx">I was alone apart from a servitor. It was a dumb-bell shaped drone hovering on silently energised levitation fields above the metal floor. Extruding a manipulator from the matt-gold surface of its upper spheroid, it offered me the jug of pale juice.</div>
<div class="tx">With a well-practised subvocal command, I enabled my entoptic system. The implant supplied the visual and tactile stimuli necessary to fully realise the imago, the simulation of Katia, drawing it from the ship’s mainbrain. Bright grids and circles interrupted my ocular field, then meshed and thickened to form my wife, frozen and lifeless but apparently solid. Copyright symbols denoting the implant company flashed, then faded. I locked her entoptic ghost over the dull form of the servitor, its compact size easily concealed within her body-space. Her blunt silver hair fell around a narrow pale face, black lips pursed like a doll’s and eyes staring right through me. Her clasped hands emerged from a long hooded scarlet gown inlaid around the shoulder with the insignia of the Mixmaster geneticists, a pair of hands holding a cat’s cradle of DNA. My wife was a geneticist to the marrow. On Yellowstone, where cybernetics was the primary creed, it made her a virtual pariah.</div>
<div class="tx">As the mainbrain-generated program took hold she grew vivacious and smiled, and her hand appeared now to grasp the jug.</div>
<div class="tx">“I was tiring of storage, my darling.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m not comfortable with this,” I admitted. “Katia—my actual Katia—despised the whole idea of you. This illusion would have especially sickened her.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It doesn’t sicken me,” Katia said.</div>
<div class="tx">“It ought to,” I said. “Aren’t your personalities supposed to be the same?”</div>
<div class="tx">She smiled, as if the point were settled. So infuriatingly like her original.</div>
<div class="tx">“I see that,” I said dubiously. The imago had been against my actual wife’s wishes. When the Melding Plague hit us I saw my chance of escape via this craft. Katia was unable to become a crewperson, so I surreptitiously set about digitizing my wife’s personality. The implant did all the hard work. It had assembled a behaviour map of Katia whenever we were together, studying her through the conduits of my own senses. The simulation grew slowly, limited by the memory capacity of the implant. But each day I downloaded more of her into an Institute mainbrain, performing this routine for weeks on end. I have no doubt that Katia suspected something, although she never made any mention of it.</div>
<div class="tx">Having completed my clandestine work, I then grafted the copy over the mind of the ship. It lacked her memories, of course, but I went to the expense and danger of having my own trawled and substituted instead, using software routines to perform the gender inversion. Katia’s personality only assumed dominance when I was in rapport with the vessel. There was no doubt in my mind that the other crew-persons had also arranged for their own fictitious companions. They too would speak to their loved ones, or some idealised fantasy of a lover, when they addressed the ship.</div>
<div class="tx">But I preferred not to think about that.</div>
<div class="tx">A lie, then. But my entire life had been a lie, Katia’s imago simply the most recent aspect of it. But why had she awoken me? Or rather: why had the ship chosen to awaken me, and not one of the others? Janos, Kaj, Hilda, Yul and Karlos still remained in reefersleep, displaying no signs of imminent thaw.</div>
<div class="tx">I upped from the table decisively. “Thank you, Katia. I’ll take a stroll, admire the view.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I must discuss something with you,” Katia said. “But I suppose it can wait a few minutes.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Ah,” I said, grinning. “You want to keep me in suspense.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Nothing of the sort, darling. Is the music fine?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Music’s fine,” I answered, leaving the kitchen.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">I entered a curving hexagonal corridor, bathed in dull ochre light. A node of Roedelius chased me, humming from piezoacoustic panels in the walls. The gravity that held me to the floor arose from our one-gee thrust, and not from the centrifugal spin of the lifesystem, otherwise the vertical and horizontal axes would have been interchanged. This fact told me that we were not at home; not approaching the cluster of carousels and asteroids called Shiphaven, in the Trojan point that trailed Jupiter. We were still on stardrive, still climbing up or down from the slowtime of light-speed.</div>
<div class="tx">We might be anywhere between Epsilon Eridani and Solspace.</div>
<div class="tx">My stroll carried me away from the core of the vessel to her skin, where the hot neutron sleet wafted past us. The parts of the vessel through which I travelled grew darker and more machinelike, colder and less familiar. Irrationally, I began to imagine that I was being pursued and observed.</div>
<div class="tx">I have never enjoyed either solitude or the dark. I was a fool, then, to address this fear by turning around. Yet the hairs on my neck were bristling and my sweat had become chilled.</div>
<div class="tx">Most of the radial corridor was dark, apart from the miserly locus of light that had followed me like a halo. Nonetheless, it was still possible to make out a darker thing looming in the distance, almost lost in the convergence of the walls.</div>
<div class="tx">I was not alone.</div>
<div class="tx">It was a figure, a silhouette, regarding me. Not Katia’s imago, for sure.</div>
<div class="tx">I felt a brief terror. “Katia,” I croaked. “Full lights, please.”</div>
<div class="tx">I jammed my eyes shut as the bright actinics snapped on. Red retinal ghosts slowly fading, I reopened them, not much more than a second later. But my watcher had gone.</div>
<div class="tx">I slowly emptied my lungs. I was wise enough not to  leap to conclusions. This was not necessarily what it appeared. After all, I had only just emerged from reefersleep, after several years of being frozen. I was bound to be a little jittery, a little open to subconscious suggestion.</div>
<div class="tx">It seemed I was utterly alone. I vowed, shakily, to put the experience immediately out of mind.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">Ten minutes later I had reached the outer hull, and was in naked space—or rather, seeing through the proxy eyes of a drone clamped on the outside with spidery grappling feet. The machine’s camera head was peering through a porthole, into the room where I sat. I looked pale and strained, but I did not have company.</div>
<div class="tx">I looked away from the porthole, towards the bow of the ship. The vessel, the <i>Wild Pallas</i>, was a ramliner—a nearlight human-rated starship. Most of what I saw, therefore, was very dense neutron shielding. The vessel required protons for its bosonic drive process. Ahead, a graser beam swept space and stripped deuterium nuclei into protons and neutrons. Our gauss scoop sifted free the protons and focused them into the heart of the ship. The neutral baryons were channelled around the hull in a lethal radiative rain, diverted clear of the lifesystem and its fragile payload of sleepers. The drone sensed the flux and passed the data to me in terms of a swirling roseate aura, as if we were diving down the gullet of the universe.</div>
<div class="tx">To the rear, things were eclipsed by the glow of the exhaust. Gamma shields burned Cherenkov-blue. Within the ship, the proton harvest was extremely short-lived. Fields targeted the protons into a beam, lancing through a swarming cloud of heavy monopoles. The relativistic protons were decelerated and steered into the magnetic nodes. Inside each monopole was a shell of bosons which coaxed the protons to disintegrate. This was the power source of a ramliner.</div>
<div class="tx">I had studied all the tech before signing up for the overmind partnership, the human-cybernetic steering committee that commanded this vessel. When I say studied, I mean that I had downloaded certain eidetic documents furnished by the Macro that owned the ship. These eidetics  entered my memory at an almost intuitive level, programmed of course to fade once my contract expired. They told me everything I needed to know and little else. We carried nine hundred reefersleep passengers and we crew comprised six humans, each of whom was an expert in one or more areas of starflight theory. My own specialties were scoop subsystems—gauss collimators and particle-ablation shields—and shipboard/in-flight medicare. The computer that wore the masque of Katia was also equipped for these zones of expertise, but it was deficient—so the cybertechs said—in human heuristic thought modes. Crew-persons were therefore its Heuristic Resources—peripherals orbiting the hard glittering core of its machine consciousness.</div>
<div class="tx">Crewpersons thus rode at a more reduced level of reefersleep than our passengers: a little warmer, a little closer to the avalanche of cell death that is life. The computer could interrogate us without the bother of complete revival. Our dreams, therefore, would be dreams where matter and number flowed in technological tsunami.</div>
<div class="tx">I altered the drone’s telemetry so that the neutron wind became invisible. Looking beyond, I saw no stars at all. Einsteinian distortion was squashing them up fore and aft, concealed by the flared ends of the ship. We were still accelerating towards light-speed.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">“Well?” I asked, much later.</div>
<div class="tx">“As you know, we’ve yet to reach midpoint. In fact, we will not reach home for another three years of shiptime.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Is this a technical problem?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Not strictly. I’m afraid it’s medical, which is why I was forced to bring you out of reefersleep between systems. Like the view, my darling?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Are you joking? An empty universe with no stars? It’s the gloomiest thing I can remember.”</div>
<div class="tx">I was back in the coldroom where the six crew reefers were stored. Katia’s data ghost stood at my side, and Mozart warmed our spirits. Mozart’s joyous familiarity drowned out all the faint, distant sounds of the ship, and the  frank necessity of this annoyed me greatly. I was not normally prone to nervousness.</div>
<div class="tx">“Janos is sick,” explained Katia. “He must have contracted the Melding Plague on Yellowstone. Unless we act now he won’t survive the rest of the journey. He needs emergency surgery.”</div>
<div class="tx">“He’s sick?” I shrugged. “Too bad. But SOP on this is clear, Katia. Freeze him down further, lock the condition in stasis.” I leaned over the smooth side of Janos’s reefer, examining the bio-med display cartouche under its coffin-lid rim. The reefer resembled a giant chrome chrysalis or silver fish, anchored by its head to a coiled nexus of umbilicals. Within this hexagonal fluted box lay Janos. His inert form was dimly visible under the frosted clear lid.</div>
<div class="tx">“Normally, that would be our wisest course of action,” Katia said. “Earthside med skills will certainly outmode our own. But in this instance the rules must be contravened. Janos can’t survive, even at emergency levels of reefer-sleep. You know about the Melding Plague.”</div>
<div class="tx">I did. We all knew about it only too well, for it had crippled Yellowstone. The Melding Plague was a biocybernetic virus, something new to our experince. Yellowstone’s intensely cybernetic society had crumbled at the nanomolecular level, the level of our computers and implants. The Melding Plague had caused our nanomachinery to grow malign.</div>
<div class="tx">I permitted Katia to explain, walking to the kitchen and preparing salami rolls, stepping briskly through the dim corridors.</div>
<div class="tx">All crewpersons were fitted with such implants. Through these data windows we interfaced with the machinery of the reefers and the mainbrain of the ship as the ramliner cruised from star to star. Janos’s virus had attacked the structure of his own implants, ripping them apart and reorganizing them into analogues of itself. From one implant node, a network of webbed strands was spreading further into his brain, in an apparent attempt to knit together all the infected locales.</div>
<div class="tx">“The experts on Yellowstone soon learned that cold does  not retard the virus significantly—certainly not the kind of cold from which a human could ever be revived. We must therefore operate immediately, before the virus gains a stronghold. And I’m afraid that our routine surgical programs will fail. We can’t use nanomachinery against the virus; it will simply subsume whatever we throw against it.”</div>
<div class="tx">I gobbled my rolls. “I don’t know neurosurgery; that wasn’t on the skills eidetic.” I brushed crumbs from my stubbled chin. “However, if Janos’s life is in danger—”</div>
<div class="tx">“We must act. How are you feeling now?”</div>
<div class="tx">“A little stiff. Nothing serious.” I forced a very stiff grin. “I’ll admit, I was a little jumpy early on. I think those ants gave me the creeps.”</div>
<div class="tx">Katia was silent for a few seconds. “That’s normal,” she eventually said. “Get plenty of rest. Then we’ll examine the surgical tools.”</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">I went jogging. I mapped a sinuous, winding path through the lifesystem, feeling the megaton mass of the ship wheel about my centre of mass. I was ruthless with myself, deliberately selecting a route that took me through every dark and shadowy region of the lifesystem I could think of. I silenced Mozart and forbade myself the company of Katia, disabling my imago inducer.</div>
<div class="tx">My thoughts turned back to the figure I imagined I had seen. What kind of rationale had flashed through my mind in the few seconds when I permitted the figure to exist outside of my imagination? Perhaps one of the sleepers might have thawed by accident and was wandering the ship in dismay. That hypothetical wanderer would have been equally surprised by my own presence. Ergo the person was now hiding.</div>
<div class="tx">Of course, the figure was undoubtedly a hallucination. One need not be drooling at the mouth to hallucinate—indeed, one could easily retain enough facilities to recognise the experience as being totally internalised. After the uneventful hours of wakefulness that had subsequently passed, I was anxious to dismiss the whole incident.</div>
<div class="tx">I jogged on, my shoes slapping the deck. I was approaching the nadir of my journey, the part of the ship that until  now I had studiously avoided. Sensing my nearing footfalls, cartwheel-shaped airlocks dilated open. I panted through an antechamber, into the vast room where nine hundred slept.</div>
<div class="tx">The chamber had the toroidal shape of a tokamak. Nine hundred deep-preservation reefers lined the inner and outer walls, crisscrossed by ladders and catwalks. I set about circumnavigating the chamber, to finally purge my mind of any stray ghosts. Hadn’t that always been my strategy as a child: confront my fears head on? I suspected that the boy in me would have been richly amused by my motives here. Nonetheless I insisted on this one ridiculous circuit, convinced it would leave me eased.</div>
<div class="tx">Most of these sleepers would stay aboard when we arrived in the Earth system. They were refugees from the Melding Plague, seeking sanctuary in the future. At the nearlight speeds this vessel attained between suns, large levels of time dilation would be experienced. Our clocks would grind to an imperceptible crawl. After thirty or forty years of shiptime, a mere six or seven hops between systems, more than a century would have elapsed on Yellowstone, enough time for eco-engineers to exorcise the biome of the Melding Plague. The sleepers we carried had elected not to risk spending the time in the planet’s community cryocrypts; in dilation sleep the effective time spent in reefers was less, and therefore their chances of completely safe revival were enormously increased.</div>
<div class="tx">I was jogging slowly enough to read the glowing name panels imprinted on each reefer. Men, women, children . . . the rich of my world, able to pay for this exorbitant journey into a brighter future. I thought of the less wealthy, those who could not even afford spaces in the cryocrypts. I thought of the long queues of people waiting to see surgeons, people like Katia, anxious to lose their implants before the disease reached them. They would pay with whatever they could: organs or prosthetics or memories. Or if they chose not to pay they might consider becoming crew. My people made good crew-fodder. It called for a certain degree of yearning desperation to accept direct interfacing with the main-brain. The hard price of our bargain was the  simple fact that our reduced state of reefersleep meant we would continue to age as we slept away the years.</div>
<div class="tx">That was not a bargain Katia had felt she could make. And I had known that I could not stand to lose my implants. Thus the Melding Plague touched us.</div>
<div class="tx">I felt bitterness, and this was welcome to me. I was happy to find familiar anxieties polluting my thoughts. I cast a dismissive glance over my shoulder, back along the curving ranks of sleepers I had already passed.</div>
<div class="tx">I was being followed.</div>
<div class="tx">The shadow was pounding along the walkway, halfway around the great curve of the chamber. I could barely see it, just a man-shaped black aperture in the distance.</div>
<div class="tx">I quickened my pace. Only my feet thudded in the silence. Yet my chaser was also running faster. I felt sick with fright. I summoned Katia, but after alerting her was unable to grasp a sentence, a command, anything. The faceless silhouette seemed to be gaining on me.</div>
<div class="tx">Faceless was right. It had no features, no detail. Eventually I reached an exit. The airlock sequence amputated the chamber from me. I did not stop running, even when I realised that the doors behind me were remaining closed. The shadow-man remained with the sleepers.</div>
<div class="tx">But I had seen enough. It was not human. Just a man-shaped hole, a spectre.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">I found the quickest route back to the command deck of the <i>Wild Pallas.</i>  Immediately I ordered Katia to begin a rigorous search for intruders, though I knew of course that no intruder could have escaped her attention thus far. My Katia was omniscient. She would have known the exact location of every rat, every fly, aboard the craft; except that aboard the ship there were no flies, no rats.</div>
<div class="tx">I knew that the shadow was not a revived sleeper. None of the reefers had been opened or vacated. A stowaway was out of the question—what was there to eat or drink, apart from the supplies dispensed by the computer?</div>
<div class="tx">My mind veered towards the illogical. Could someone have entered the ship during its flight—someone dressed  as a chameleon? That imagined intruder would have somehow had to achieve invisibility from Katia’s eyes. Clearly impossible, even disregarding the unlikely manoeuvres required to match our velocity and position undetected.</div>
<div class="tx">I chewed on my lip, aware that each second of indecision counted against Janos. For my own defence, Katia would permit me access to a weapon, provided of course that the existence of the intruder was proven. Alternatively, I might best confront the situation by not confronting it. I could perform surgery on Janos without straying into those regions of the ship that the intruder had apparently claimed as its haunt. In a day or so, therefore, this ordeal might be over, and I could re-enter reefersleep. The most faceless, inhuman entities I would have to contend with upon my next revival would be Solpace Axis customs officials. Let them worry about the unseen extra passenger. Hadn’t the shadow permitted me safe slumber so far?</div>
<div class="tx">I chuckled, though to my ears it sounded more like a death-rattle. I was still frightened, but for once my hands had stopped playing arpeggios on the keys of an invisible piano.</div>
<div class="tx">I absorbed myself in technical eidetics outlining the medical systems Katia and I were about to employ. The gleaming semirobotic tools were the culmination of Yellowstone’s surgical sciences. Even so, they would undoubtedly appear crude by Earthside standards. This dichotomy galled me. Even if Janos would necessarily worsen by the time we arrived, how could we be certain that we were not reducing his chances with our outdated medical intervention? Perhaps Earth would have accelerated so far beyond our capabilities that the equation was no longer balanced in our favour.</div>
<div class="tx">Yet Katia would have weighed the issue minutely before selecting the appropriate course of action. Perhaps, then, it was best simply to silence one’s qualms and do whatever was required.</div>
<div class="tx">Drones assisted me in carrying the medical machinery into the crew reefer room, where my five colleagues lay in frozen sleep. I wore a facemask and a gloved jumpsuit, inwoven with a heating circuit. Katia would lower the room’s temperature before slightly increasing Janos’s own.</div>
<div class="tx">“Ready, Uri?” she asked. “Let’s start.”</div>
<div class="tx">So we commenced, my eyes constantly flicking to the open reefer I hoped soon to re-enter. The room rapidly chilled, lights burning frigid blue from the overheads.</div>
<div class="tx">Janos’s reefer cracked open with a gasp of release cold. I looked at Janos, still and white and somehow distant. Let that distance remain, I prayed. After all, we were about to open his head.</div>
<div class="tx">Katia, in fact, had already performed some preliminary surgery. The skull had been exposed, skin pulled back as if framing the white pistil of a flesh-leaved flower. Slender probes entered the scalp via drilled holes, trailing glowing coloured cables into a matrix of input points in the domed head of the reefer. The work was angstrom-precise, rendered with a robot’s deadening perfection. I had been briefed: those cables were substituting for the cybernetic implants within his brain that had fallen victim to the Melding Plague.</div>
<div class="tx">“When you have the top of the skull free you should feed it back along the cables,” Katia told me. “It’s crucial that we don’t lose cyber-interface with Janos.”</div>
<div class="tx">I prepped the mechanical bone-saw. “Why? What use is he to us?”</div>
<div class="tx">“There are good reasons. If you’re still interested we can discuss it after the operation.”</div>
<div class="tx">The saw hummed into life, the rotary tip glinting evilly. Katia vectored the blade down, smoothly gnawing into the pale bone. Little blood oozed free but the sound struck an unpleasant resonance with me. Katia made three expert circumferential passes, then retracted. I took a deep breath, then placed gloved fingers on the top of Janos’s head. The scalp felt loose, like half of a chocolate egg. I eased the section of skull free with a wet sucking slurp, exposing the damp pinkish mass of dura and gyrus, snuggling in the lower bowl of the skull. I took special care to maintain the integrity of the connections as I separated the bonework. For a while, humbled, I could only stand in awe of this fantastic organ, easily the most complex, alien thing my eyes had  ever gazed on. And yet it managed to look so disappointingly vegetable.</div>
<div class="tx">“Husband, we must proceed,” warned Katia. “I have warmed Janos to a dangerously high body temperature, whilst not greatly increasing his metabolic rate. We don’t have time to waste.”</div>
<div class="tx">I felt sweat beading my forehead. I nodded. Inward, inward. Katia swung a new battery of blades and microlasers into play.</div>
<div class="tx">We operated to the music of Sibelius.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">It was intriguing and repellent work.</div>
<div class="tx">I succeeded in detaching my mind to some extent, so that I was able to regard the parting brain tissue as dead but somehow sacred meat. The micro-implants came out one by one, too small for the naked eye to discern detail, barbed hunks of corroded metal. The corrosion, observable under a microscope, was the external evidence of the cybervirus. I studied it with rank feelings of abstract distaste. The virus behaved like its biological namesake, clamping onto the shell of the nanostructure and pulsing subversive instructions deep into its reproductive heart.</div>
<div class="tx">After three hours my back boiled with pain. I leaned away from the reefer, brushing a sleeve against my chilled forehead. I felt the room swimming, clotting with blobs of muggy darkness. For an instant I became disoriented, convinced that left was right and vice versa. I braced myself against the reefer as this dizziness washed over me.</div>
<div class="tx">“Not long now,” Katia said. “How do you feel?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m fine. And you?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m . . . fine. The op’s proceeding well.” Katia paused, then stiffened her voice with iron resolve, businesslike detachment. “The next implant is the deepest. It lies between the occipital lobe and the cerebellum. We must take care to avoid lesion of the visual centre. This is the primary entoptic infeed node.”</div>
<div class="tx">“In we go, then.”</div>
<div class="tx">The machinery snicked obediently into place. Our ciliated  microprobes slid into the tissue, like flexible syringes slipping into jelly. Despite the cold I found myself hot around the collar, iced sweat prickling my skin. Another hour passed, though time had ceased to have very much meaning.</div>
<div class="tx">And I froze, conscious of a presence behind me, in the same room.</div>
<div class="tx">Compelled, I turned. The watcher was with me.</div>
<div class="tx">I saw now that it could not be a man. Yet it did have a humanoid form, a humanoid of my build and posture.</div>
<div class="tx">A sculptor had selected ten thousand raven-black cubes, so dark that they were pure silhouettes, and arranged them as a blocky statue. That was the entirety of the watcher: a mass of black cubes.</div>
<div class="tx">As I turned, it swung towards me. None of the cubes from which it was formed actually moved; they simply blipped out and reappeared in an orchestrated wave, whole new strata of cubes forming in thin air. They popped in and out of reality to mould its altering posture. To my eyes the motion had a beguiling, digital beauty. I thought of the coloured patterns that would sweep across a stadium of schoolchildren holding painted mosaic cards to image some great slogan or emblem.</div>
<div class="tx">I raised my left arm, and observed the shadow repeat the action from its point of view. We were not mirrors of one another. We were ghosts.</div>
<div class="tx">My terror had reached some peak and evaporated. I grasped that the watcher was essentially motiveless, that it had been drawn to me as inevitably as a shrinking noon shadow.</div>
<div class="tx">“Continue with the operation,” insisted Katia. I noticed hesitancy in her voice, true to her personality to the end. She liked games, my Katia, but she was never a convincing liar.</div>
<div class="tx">“Lesion of the visual centre, you say?”</div>
<div class="tx">“That is what we must be careful to avoid.”</div>
<div class="tx">I grimaced. I had to know for sure.</div>
<div class="tx">I scooped up one of the detached nanoprobes. In reality, the drones mimicked my intentions with their own manipulators, picking up the nanoprobe’s platonic twin . . . Then  I jammed it recklessly into Janos’s head, into his occipital lobe.</div>
<div class="tx">This reality melted and shattered, as if a stone had fallen into and disturbed the reflections on a crystal-mooth lake.</div>
<div class="tx">I knew, then.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">My vision slowly unpeeled itself, returning to normality in strips. Katia was doing this, attempting to cancel the damage in my visual centre by sending distorted signals along the optic infeeds. I realised that I no longer had control of the surgical tools.</div>
<div class="tx">“I am the patient,” I said. “Not Janos. The surgeon is the one who needs surgery. How ironic.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It was best that you not know,” Katia said. And then, very rapidly, she herself flickered and warped, her voice momentarily growing cavernous and slurred. “I’m failing . . . there isn’t much time.”</div>
<div class="tx">“And the watcher?”</div>
<div class="tx">“A symptom,” she said ruefully. “A symptom of my own illness. A false mapping of your own body image within the simulation.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re a simulation!” I roared. “I can understand your image being affected . . . but you—yourself—you don’t exist in my head! You’re a program running in the main-brain!”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yes, darling. But the Melding Plague has also reached the mainbrain.” She paused, and then, withut warning, her voice became robotically flat and autistic. “Much of the computer is damaged. To keep this simulation intact has necessitated sacrifices in tertiary function levels. However, the primary goal is to guarantee that you do not die. The operation-in-progress must be completed. In order to maintain the integrity of the simulation, the tuple-ensemble coded KATIA must be removed from main memory. This operation has now been executed.”</div>
<div class="tx">She froze, her last moment locked within my implant, trapped in my eyes like a spot of sun-blindness. It was just me and the computer then, not forgetting the ever-present watcher.</div>
<div class="tx">What could I do but continue with the surgery? I had a reason now. I wanted to excise the frozen ghost of Katia from my mind. She was the real lesion.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">So I survived.</div>
<div class="tx">Many years passed for us. Our ship’s computer was so damaged by the Melding Plague that we could not decelerate in time to reach the Earth system. Our choice was to steer for 61 Cygni-A, around which lay the colony Sky’s Edge. Our dilation sleepers consequently found themselves further from home both in time and space than they had expected. Secretly we cherished the justice in this, we who had sacrificed parts of our lives to crew their dream-voyage. Yet they had not lost so very much, and I suppose I would have been one of their number had I had their power. Concerning Katia . . .</div>
<div class="tx">The simulation was never properly reanimated.</div>
<div class="tx">The shipboard memory in which it lay fell prey to the Melding Plague, and much of its data was badly corrupted. When I did attempt to recreate her, I found only a crude caricature, all spontaneity sapped away, as lifeless and cruelly predictable as a Babbage engine. In a fit of remorse I destroyed the imago. It helped that I was blind, for even this façade had been programmed to exhibit fear, programmed to plead once it guessed my intentions.</div>
<div class="tx">That was years ago. I tell myself that she never lived. And that at least is what the cybertechs would have us believe.</div>
<div class="tx">The last information pulse from Yellowstone told me that the real Katia is still alive, of course much older than when I knew her. She has been married twice. To her the days of our union must seem as ancient and fragile as an heirloom. But she does not yet know that I survived. I transmitted to her, but the signal will not reach Epsilon Eridani for a decade. And then I will have to await her reply, more years still.</div>
<div class="tx">Perhaps she will reply in person. This is our only hope of meeting, because I . . .</div>
<div class="tx">I will not fly again. Nor will I sleep out the decades.</div>
</body>
</html>