<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"/>
<title>Galactic North</title>
<link href="reyn_9780441016006_oeb_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/adobe-page-template+xml"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:60eaa905-6e96-4a49-89d3-db4cba8c398a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<p><a id="c07"/></p>
<div class="ct"><b>NIGHTINGALE</b></div>
<div class="tx1">I checked the address Tomas Martinez had given me, shielding the paper against the rain while I squinted at my scrawl. The number I’d written down didn’t correspond with any of the high-and-dry offices, but it was a dead ringer for one of the low-rent premises at street level. Here the walls of Threadfall Canyon had been cut and buttressed to the height of six or seven storeys, widening the available space at the bottom of the trench. Buildings covered most of the walls, piled on top of each other, supported by a haphazard arrangement of stilts and rickety, semipermanent bamboo scaffolding. Aerial walkways had been strung from one side of the street to the other, with stairs and ladders snaking their way through the dark fissures between the buildings. Now and then a wheeler sped through the water, sending a filthy brown wave in its wake. Very rarely, a sleek, claw-like volantor slid overhead. But volantors were off-world tech and not many people on Sky’s Edge could afford that kind of thing any more.</div>
<div class="tx">It didn’t look right to me, but all the evidence said that this had to be the place.</div>
<div class="tx">I stepped out of the water onto the wooden platform in front of the office and knocked on the glass-fronted door while rain curtained down through holes in the striped awning above me. I was pushing soaked hair out of my eyes when the door opened.</div>
<div class="tx">I’d seen enough photographs of Martinez to know this wasn’t him. This was a big bull of a man, nearly as wide as the door. He stood there with his arms crossed in front of his chest, over which he wore only a sleeveless black vest that was zipped down to his midriff. His muscles were so tight it looked as if he was wearing some kind of body-hugging amplification suit. His head was very large and very bald, rooted to his body by a neck like a small mountain range. The skin around his right eye was paler than the rest of his face, in a neatly circular patch.</div>
<div class="tx">He looked down at me as if I was something unpleasant the rain had washed in.</div>
<div class="tx">“What?” he said, his voice like the distant rumble of artillery.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m here to see Martinez.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Mister Martinez to you,” he said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Whatever. But I’m still here to see him, and he should be expecting me. I’m—”</div>
<div class="tx">“Dexia Scarrow,” called another voice—fractionally more welcoming, this one—and a smaller, older man bustled into view from behind the pillar of muscle blocking the door, snatching delicate pince-nez glasses from his nose. “Let her in, Norbert. She’s expected. Just a little <i>late.</i>”</div>
<div class="tx">“I got held up around Armesto—my hired wheeler hit a pothole and tipped over. Couldn’t get the thing started again, so had to—”</div>
<div class="tx">The smaller man waved aside my excuse. “You’re here now, which is all that matters. I’ll have Norbert dry your clothes, if you wish.”</div>
<div class="tx">I peeled off my coat. “Maybe this.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Norbert will attend to your galoshes as well. Would you care for something to drink? I have tea already prepared, but if you would rather something else . . .”</div>
<div class="tx">“Tea will be fine, Mister Martinez,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Please, call me Tomas. It’s my sincere wish that we will work together as friends.”</div>
<div class="tx">I stepped out of my galoshes and handed my dripping-wet coat to the big man. Martinez nodded once, the gesture precise and birdlike, and then beckoned me to follow him further into his rooms. He was slighter and older than I’d been expecting, although still recognisable as the man in the photographs. His hair was grey turning to white, thinning on his crown and shaved close to his scalp elsewhere on his head. He wore a grey waistcoat over a grey shirt, the ensemble lending him a drab, clerkish air.</div>
<div class="tx">We navigated a twisting labyrinth formed by four layers of brown boxes, piled to head height. “Excuse the mess,” Martinez said, looking back at me over his shoulder. “I really should find a better solution to my filing problems, but there’s always something more pressing that needs doing instead.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m surprised you have time to eat, let alone worry about filing problems.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Well, things haven’t been quite as hectic lately, I must confess. If you’ve been following the news you’ll know that I’ve already caught most of my big fish. There’s some mopping up to do, but I’ve been nowhere near as busy as in . . .” Martinez stopped suddenly next to one of the piles of boxes, placed his glasses back on the bridge of his nose and scuffed dust from the paper label on the side of the box nearest his face. “No,” he said, shaking his head. “Wrong place. Wrong damned place! Norbert!”</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert trudged along behind us, my sodden coat still draped over one of his enormous, trunk-like arms. “Mister Martinez?”</div>
<div class="tx">“This one is in the wrong place.” The smaller man turned around and indicated a spot between two other boxes, on the opposite side of the corridor. “It goes <i>here.</i>  It needs to be properly filed. Kessler’s case is moving into court next month, and we don’t want any trouble with missing documentation.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Attend to it,” Norbert said, which sounded like an order  but which I assumed was his way of saying he’d remember to move the box when he was done with my laundry.</div>
<div class="tx">“Kessler?” I asked, when Norbert had left. “As in Till-man Kessler, the NC interrogator?”</div>
<div class="tx">“One and the same, yes. Did you have experience with him?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I wouldn’t be standing here if I did.”</div>
<div class="tx">“True enough. But a small number of people were fortunate enough to survive their encounters with Kessler. Their testimonies will help bring him to justice.”</div>
<div class="tx">“By which you mean crucifixion.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I detect faint disapproval, Dexia,” Martinez said.</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re right. It’s barbaric.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s how we’ve always done things. The Haussmann way, if you like.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sky Haussmann: the man who gave this world its name, and who sparked off the two-hundred-and-fifty-year war we’ve only just learned to stop fighting. When they crucified Sky they thought they were putting an early end to the violence. They couldn’t have been more wrong. Ever since, crucifixion has been the preferred method of execution.</div>
<div class="tx">“Is Kessler the reason you asked me here, sir? Were you expecting me to add to the case file against him?”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez paused at a heavy wooden door. “Not Kessler, no. I’ve every expectation of seeing him nailed to Bridgetop by the end of the year. But it does concern the man for whom Kessler was an instrument.”</div>
<div class="tx">I thought about that for a moment. “Kessler worked for Colonel Jax, didn’t he?”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez opened the door and ushered me through, into the windowless room beyond. By now we must have been back into the canyon wall. The air had the inert stillness of a crypt. “Yes, Kessler was Jax’s man,” Martinez said. “I’m glad you made the connection: it saves me explaining why Jax ought to be brought to justice.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I agree completely. Half the population would agree with you. But I’m afraid you’re a bit late: Jax died years ago.”</div>
<div class="tx">Two other people were already waiting in the room, sitting  on settees either side of a low black table set with tea, coffee and pisco sours.</div>
<div class="tx">“Jax didn’t die,” Martinez said. “He just disappeared, and now I know where he is. Have a seat, please.”</div>
<div class="tx">He knew I was interested; knew I wouldn’t be able to walk out of that room until I’d heard the rest of the story about Colonel Brandon Jax. But there was more to it than that: there was something effortlessly commanding about his voice that made it very difficult not to obey him. During my time in the Southland Militia I’d learned that some people have that authority and some people don’t. It can’t be taught; can’t be learned; can’t be faked. You’re either born with it or you’re not.</div>
<div class="tx">“Dexia Scarrow, allow me to introduce you to my other two guests,” Martinez said, when I’d taken my place at the table. “The gentleman opposite you is Salvatore Nicolosi, a veteran of one of the Northern Coalition’s freeze/thaw units. The woman on your right is Ingrid Sollis, a personal-security expert with a particular interest in counter-intrusion systems. Ingrid saw early combat experience with the Southland, but she soon left the military to pursue private interests.”</div>
<div class="tx">I bit my tongue, then turned my attention away from the woman before I said something I might regret. The man—Nicolosi—looked more like an actor than a soldier. He didn’t have a scar on him. His beard was so neatly groomed, so sharp-edged, that it looked sprayed on through a stencil. Freeze/thaw operatives rubbed me up the wrong way, no matter which side they’d been on. They’d always seen themselves as superior to the common soldier, which is why they didn’t feel the need for the kind of excessive musculature Norbert carried around.</div>
<div class="tx">“Allow me to introduce Dexia Scarrow,” Martinez continued, nodding at me. “Dexia was a distinguished soldier in the Southland Militia for fifteen years, until the armistice. Her service record is excellent. I believe she will be a valuable addition to the team.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe we should back up a step,” I said. “I haven’t agreed to be part of anyone’s team.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re going after Jax,” Nicolosi said placidly. “Doesn’t that excite you?”</div>
<div class="tx">“He was on your side,” I said. “What makes you so keen to see him crucified?”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi looked momentarily pained. “He was a war criminal, Dexia. I’m as anxious to see monsters like Jax brought to justice as I am to see the same fate visited on their scum-ridden Southland counterparts.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Nicolosi’s right,” said Ingrid Sollis. “If we’re going to learn to live together on this planet, we have to put the law above all else, regardless of former allegiances.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Easy coming from a deserter,” I said. “Allegiance clearly didn’t mean very much to you back then, so I’m not surprised it doesn’t mean much to you now.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez, still standing at the head of the table, smiled tolerantly, as if he’d expected nothing less.</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s an understandable misapprehension, Dexia, but Ingrid was no deserter. She was wounded in the line of duty: severely, I might add. After her recuperation, she was commended for bravery under fire and given the choice of an honourable discharge or a return to the front line. You cannot blame her for choosing the former, especially given all she had been through.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Okay, my mistake,” I said. “It’s just that I never heard of many people making it out alive, before the war was over.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis looked at me icily. “Some of us did.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No one here has anything but an impeccable service record,” Martinez said. “I should know: I’ve been through your individual biographies with a fine-tooth comb. You’re just the people for the job.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t think so,” I said, moving to stand up. “I’m just a retired soldier with a grudge against deserters. I wasn’t in some shit-hot freeze/thaw unit, and I didn’t do anything that resulted in any commendations for bravery. Sorry, folks, but I think—”</div>
<div class="tx">“Remain seated.”</div>
<div class="tx">I did what the man said.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez continued speaking, his voice as measured  and patient as ever. “You participated in at least three high-risk extraction operations, Dexia: three dangerous forays behind enemy lines, to retrieve two deep-penetration Southland spies and one trump-card NC defector. Or do you deny this?”</div>
<div class="tx">I shook my head, the reality of what he was proposing still not sinking in. “I can’t help you. I don’t know anything about Jax—”</div>
<div class="tx">“You don’t need to. That’s my problem.”</div>
<div class="tx">“How are you so sure he’s still alive, anyway?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’d like to know that, too,” Nicolosi said, stroking an elegant finger along the border of his beard.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez sat down on his own stool at the head of the table, so that he was higher than the three of us. He removed his glasses and fiddled with them in his lap. “It is necessary that you take a certain amount of what I am about to tell you on faith. I’ve been gathering intelligence on men like Jax for years, and in doing so I’ve come to rely on a web of contacts, many of whom have conveyed information to me at great personal risk. If I were to tell you the whole story, and if some of that story were to leak beyond this office, lives might well be endangered. And that is to say nothing of how my chances of bringing other fugitives to justice might be undermined.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We understand,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">I bridled at the way she presumed to speak for all of us. Perhaps she felt she owed Martinez for the way he’d just stood up for her.</div>
<div class="tx">Again I bit my lip and said nothing.</div>
<div class="tx">“For a long time, I’ve received titbits of intelligence concerning Colonel Jax: rumours that he did not, in fact, die at all, but is still at large.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Where?” Sollis asked. “On Sky’s Edge?”</div>
<div class="tx">“It would seem not. There were, of course, many rumours and false trails that suggested Jax had gone to ground somewhere on this planet. But one by one I discounted them all. Slowly the truth became apparent: Jax is still alive; still within this system.”</div>
<div class="tx">I felt it was about time I made a positive contribution. “Wouldn’t a piece of dirt like Jax try to get out of the system at the first opportunity?”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez favoured my observation by pointing his glasses at me. “I had my fears that he might have, but as the evidence came in, a different truth presented itself.”</div>
<div class="tx">He set about pouring himself some tea. The pisco sours were going unwanted. I doubted that any of us had the stomach for drink at that time of the day.</div>
<div class="tx">“Where is he, then?” asked Nicolosi. “Plenty of criminal elements might have the means to shelter a man like Jax, but given the price on his head, the temptation to turn him in—”</div>
<div class="tx">“He is not being sheltered,” Martinez said, sipping delicately at his tea before continuing, “He is alone, aboard a ship. The ship was believed lost, destroyed in the final stages of the war, when things escalated into space. But I have evidence that the ship is still essentially intact, with a functioning life-support system. There is every reason to believe that Jax is still being kept alive, aboard this vehicle, in this system.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What’s he waiting for?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“For memories to grow dim,” Martinez answered. “Like many powerful men, Jax may have obtained longevity drugs—or at least undergone longevity treatment—during the latter stages of the war. Time is not a concern for him.”</div>
<div class="tx">I leaned forward. “This ship—you think it’ll just be a matter of boarding it and taking him alive?”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez looked surprised at the directness of my question. He blinked once before answering.</div>
<div class="tx">“In essence, yes.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Won’t he put up a fight?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t think so. The Ultras that located the vessel for me reported that it appeared dormant, in power-conservation mode. Jax himself may be frozen, in reefer-sleep. The ship did not respond to the Ultras’ sensor sweeps, so there’s no reason to assume it will respond to our approach and docking.”</div>
<div class="tx">“How close did the Ultras get?” Sollis asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Within three or four light-minutes. But there’s no reason to assume we can’t get closer without alerting the ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">“How do you know Jax is aboard this ship?” Nicolosi asked. “It could just be a drifter, nothing to do with him.”</div>
<div class="tx">“The intelligence I’d already gleaned pointed towards his presence aboard a vehicle of a certain age, size and design—everything matches.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So let’s cut to the chase,” Sollis said, again presuming to speak for the rest of us. “You’ve brought us here because you think we’re the team to snatch the colonel. I’m the intrusion specialist, so you’ll be relying on me to get us inside that ship. Nicolosi’s a freeze/thaw veteran, so—apart from the fact that he’s probably pretty handy with a weapon or two—he’ll know how to spring Jax from reefer-sleep, if the colonel turns out to be frozen. And she—what was your name again?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Dexia,” I said, like it was a threat.</div>
<div class="tx">“She’s done some extractions. I guess she must be okay at her job or she wouldn’t be here.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez waited a moment, then nodded. “You’re quite right, Ingrid: all credit to you for that. I apologise if my machinations are so nakedly transparent. But the simple fact of the matter is that you are the ideal team for the operation in question. I have no doubt that, with your combined talents, you will succeed in returning Colonel Jax to Sky’s Edge, and hence to trial. Now admit it: that <i>would</i> be something, wouldn’t it? To fell the last dragon?”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi indicated his approval with a long nasal sigh. “Men like Kessler are just a distraction. When you crucify a monster like Kessler, you’re punishing the knife, not the man who wielded it. If you wish true justice, you must find the knifeman, the master.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What will we get paid?” Sollis asked.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez smiled briefly. “Fifty thousand Australs for each of you, upon the safe return of Colonel Jax.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What if we find him dead?” I asked. “By then we’ll already have risked an approach and docking with his ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">“If Jax is already dead, then you will be paid twenty-five thousand Australs.”</div>
<div class="tx">We all looked at each other. I knew what the others were thinking. Fifty thousand Australs was life-changing money, but half of that wasn’t bad either. Killing Jax would be much easier and safer than extracting him alive . . .</div>
<div class="tx">“I’ll be with you, of course,” Martinez said, “so there’ll be no need to worry about proving Jax was already dead when you arrived, should that situation arise.”</div>
<div class="tx">“If you’re coming along,” I asked, “who else do we need to know about?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Only Norbert. And you need have no fears concerning his competency.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Just the five of us, then,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Five is a good number, don’t you think? And there is a practical limit to the size of the extraction team. I have obtained the use of a small but capable ship, perfectly adequate for our purposes. It will carry five, with enough capacity to bring back the colonel. I’ll provide weapons, equipment and armour, but you may all bring whatever you think may prove useful.”</div>
<div class="tx">I looked around the cloister-like confines of the room, and remembered the dismal exterior of the offices, situated at the bottom of Threadfall Canyon. “Three times fifty thousand Australs,” I mused, “plus whatever it cost you to hire and equip a ship. If you don’t mind me asking—where exactly are the funds coming from?”</div>
<div class="tx">“The funds are mine,” Martinez said sternly. “Capturing Jax has been a long-term goal, not some whimsical course upon which I have only recently set myself. Dying a pauper would be a satisfactory end to my affairs, were I to do so knowing that Jax was hanging from the highest mast at Bridgetop.”</div>
<div class="tx">For a moment none of us said anything. Martinez had spoken so softly, so demurely, that the meaning of his words seemed to lag slightly behind the statement itself. When it arrived, I think we all saw a flash of that corpse, executed in the traditional way, the Haussmann way.</div>
<div class="tx">“Good weapons?” I asked. “Not some reconditioned black-market shit?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Only the best.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Technical specs for the ship?” Sollis asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“You’ll have plenty of time to review the data on the way to the rendezvous point. I don’t doubt that a woman of your abilities will be able to select the optimum entry point.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis looked flattered. “Then I guess I’m in. What about you, Salvatore?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Men like Colonel Jax stained the honour of the Northern Coalition. We were not all monsters. If I could do something to make people see that . . .” Nicolosi trailed off, then shrugged. “Yes, I am in. It would be an honour, Mister Martinez.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That leaves you, Dexia,” Sollis said. “Fifty thousand Australs sounds pretty sweet to me. I’m guessing it sounds pretty sweet to you as well.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s my call, not yours.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Just saying . . . you look like you could use that money as much as any of us.”</div>
<div class="tx">I think I came close to saying no, to walking out of that room, back into the incessant muddy rain of Threadfall Canyon. Perhaps if I’d tried, Norbert would have been forced to detain me, so that I didn’t go blabbing about how a team was being put together to bring Colonel Jax back into custody. But I never got the chance to find out what Martinez had in mind for me if I chose not to go along with him.</div>
<div class="tx">I only had to think about the way I looked in the mirror, and what those fifty thousand Australs could do for me.</div>
<div class="tx">So I said yes.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">Martinez gestured towards one of the blank pewter-grey walls in the shuttle’s compartment, causing it to glow and fill with neon-bright lines. The lines meshed and intersected, forming a schematic diagram of a ship with an accompanying scale.</div>
<div class="tx">“Intelligence on Jax’s ship is fragmentary. Strip out all the contradictory reports, discard unreliable data, and we’re left with this.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s it?” Sollis asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“When we get within visual range we’ll be able to improve  matters. I shall re-examine all of the reports, including those that were discarded. Some of them—when we have the real ship to compare them against—may turn out to have merit after all. They may in turn shed useful light on the interior layout, and the likely location of Jax. By then, of course, we’ll also have infrared and deep-penetration radar data from our own sensors.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It looks like a pretty big ship,” I said as I studied the schematic, scratching at my scalp. We were a day out from Armesto Field, with the little shuttle tucked into the belly hold of an outbound lighthugger named <i>Death of Sophonisba.</i></div>
<div class="tx">“Big but not the right shape for a lighthugger,” Sollis said. “So what are we dealing with here?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Good question,” I said. Martinez was showing us a rectangular hull about one kilometre from end to end; maybe a hundred metres deep and a hundred metres wide, with some kind of spherical bulge about halfway along. There was a suggestion of engines at one end, and of a gauntlet-like docking complex at the other. The ship was too blunt for interstellar travel, and it lacked the outrigger-mounted engines characteristic of Conjoiner drive mechanisms. “Does look kind of familiar, though,” I added. “Anyone else getting that déjà vu feeling, or is it just me?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know,” Nicolosi said. “When I first saw it, I thought . . .” He shook his head. “It can’t be. It must be a standard hull design.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’ve seen it before, too,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Does that ship have a name?” Nicolosi asked Martinez.</div>
<div class="tx">“I have no idea what Jax calls his ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s not what the man asked,” Sollis said. “He asked if—”</div>
<div class="tx">“I know the name of the ship,” I said quietly. “I saw a ship like that once, when I was being taken aboard it. I’d been injured in a firefight, one of the last big surface battles. They took me into space—this was after the elevator came down, so it had to be by shuttle—and brought me aboard that ship. It was a hospital ship, orbiting the planet.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What was the name of the ship?” Nicolosi asked urgently.</div>
<div class="tx"><i>“Nightingale,”</i> I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Oh, no.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re surprised.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Damn right I’m surprised. I was aboard <i>Nightingale</i>, too.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So was I,” Sollis said, her voice barely a whisper. “I didn’t recognise it, though. I was too fucked up to pay much attention until they put me back together aboard it. By then, I guess . . .”</div>
<div class="tx">“Same with me,” Nicolosi said. “Stitched back together aboard <i>Nightingale</i>, then repatriated.”</div>
<div class="tx">Slowly, we all turned and looked at Martinez. Even Norbert, who had contributed nothing until that point, turned to regard his master. Martinez blinked, but otherwise his composure was impeccable.</div>
<div class="tx">“The ship is indeed <i>Nightingale.</i>  It was too risky to tell you when we were still on the planet. Had any of Jax’s allies learned of the identity—”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis cut him off. “Is that why you didn’t tell us? Or is it because you knew we’d all been aboard that thing once already?”</div>
<div class="tx">“The fact that you have all been aboard <i>Nightingale</i> was a factor in your selection, nothing more. It was your skills that marked you out for this mission, not your medical history.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So why didn’t you tell us?” she persisted.</div>
<div class="tx">“Again, had I told you more than was wise—”</div>
<div class="tx">“You lied to us.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I did no such thing.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Wait,” Nicolosi said, his voice calmer than I was expecting. “Let’s just . . . deal with this, shall we? We’re getting hung up on the fact that we were all healed aboard <i>Nightingale</i>, when the real question we should be asking is this: what the hell is Jax doing aboard a ship that doesn’t exist any more?”</div>
<div class="tx">“What’s the problem with the ship?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“The problem,” Nicolosi said, speaking directly to me,  “is that <i>Nightingale</i> was reported destroyed near the end of the war. Or were you not keeping up with the news?”</div>
<div class="tx">I shrugged. “Guess I wasn’t.”</div>
<div class="tx">“And yet you knew enough about the ship to recognise it.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Like I said, I remember the view from the medical shuttle. I was drugged-up, unsure whether I was going to live or die . . . everything was heightened, intense, like in a bad dream. But after they healed me and sent me back down surfaceside? I don’t think I ever thought about <i>Nightingale</i> again.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Not even when you look in the mirror?” Nicolosi asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“I thought about what they’d done to me, how much better a job it could have been. But it never crossed my mind to wonder what had happened to the ship afterwards. So what <i>did</i> happen?”</div>
<div class="tx">“You said ‘they healed me,’” Nicolosi observed. “Does that mean you were treated by doctors, by men and women?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Shouldn’t I have been?”</div>
<div class="tx">He shook his head minutely. “My guess is you were wounded and shipped aboard <i>Nightingale</i> soon after it was deployed.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s possible.”</div>
<div class="tx">“In which case <i>Nightingale</i> was still in commissioning phase. I went aboard later. What about you, Ingrid?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Me, too. I hardly saw another human being the whole time I was aboard that thing.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That was how it was meant to operate: with little more than a skeleton staff, to make medical decisions the ship couldn’t make for itself. Most of the time they were meant to stay behind the scenes.”</div>
<div class="tx">“All I remember was a hospital ship,” I said. “I don’t know anything about ‘commissioning.’”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi explained it to me patiently, as if I was a small child in need of education.</div>
<div class="tx"><i>Nightingale</i> had been financed and built by a consortium of well-meaning postmortal aristocrats. Since their  political influence hadn’t succeeded in curtailing the war (and since many of their aristocratic friends were quite happy for it to continue) they’d decided to make a difference in the next-best way: by alleviating the suffering of the mortal men and women engaged in the war itself.</div>
<div class="tx">So they created a hospital ship, one that had no connection to either the Northern Coalition or the Southland Militia. <i>Nightingale</i> would be there for all injured soldiers, irrespective of allegiance. Aboard the neutral ship, the injured would be healed, allowed to recuperate and then repatriated. All but the most critically wounded would eventually return to active combat service. And <i>Nightingale</i> itself would be state-of-the-art, with better medical facilities than any other public hospital on or around Sky’s Edge. It wouldn’t be the glittering magic of Demarchist medicine, but it would still be superior to anything most mortals had ever experienced.</div>
<div class="tx">It would also be tirelessly efficient, dedicated only to improving its healing record. <i>Nightingale</i> was designed to operate autonomously, as a single vast machine. Under the guidance of human specialists, the ship would slowly improve its methods until it had surpassed its teachers. I’d come aboard ship when it was still undergoing the early stages of its learning curve, but—as I learned from Nicolosi—the ship had soon moved into its “operational phase.” By then, the entire kilometre-long vehicle was under the control of only a handful of technicians and surgical specialists, with gamma-level intelligences making most of the day-to-day decisions. That was when Sollis and Nicolosi had been shipped aboard. They’d been healed by machines, with only a vague awareness that there was a watchful human presence behind the walls.</div>
<div class="tx">“It worked, too,” Nicolosi said. “The ship did everything its sponsors had hoped it would. It functioned like a huge, efficient factory: sucking in the wounded, spitting out the healed.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Only for them to go back to the war,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“The sponsors didn’t have any control over what happened when the healed were sent back down. But at least  they were still alive; at least they hadn’t died on the battle field or the operating table. The sponsors could still believe that they had done something good. They could still sleep at night.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So <i>Nightingale</i> was a success,” I said. “What’s the problem? Wasn’t it turned over to civilian use after the armistice?”</div>
<div class="tx">“The ship was destroyed just before the ceasefire,” Nicolosi said. “That’s why we shouldn’t be seeing it now. A stray NC missile, nuke-tipped . . . too fast to be intercepted by the ship’s own countermeasures. It took out <i>Nightingale</i>, with staff and patients still aboard her.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Now that you mention it . . . maybe I did hear about something like that.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis looked fiercely at Martinez. “I say we renegotiate terms. You never told us we were going to have to spring Jax from a fucking ghost ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert moved to his master’s side, as if to protect him from the furious Sollis. Martinez, who had said nothing for many minutes, removed his glasses, buffed them on his shirt and replaced them with an unhurried calm.</div>
<div class="tx">“Perhaps you are right to be cross with me, Ingrid. And perhaps I made a mistake in not mentioning <i>Nightingale</i> sooner. But it was imperative that I not compromise this operation with a single careless indiscretion. My whole life has been an arrow pointing to this one task: the bringing to justice of Colonel Jax. I will not fail myself now.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You should have told us about the hospital ship,” Nicolosi said. “None of us would have had any reason to spread that information. We all want to see Jax get his due.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then I have made a mistake, for which I apologise.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis shook her head. “I don’t think an apology’s going to cut it. If I’d known I was going to have to go back aboard that . . . <i>thing</i>—”</div>
<div class="tx">“You are right,” Martinez said, addressing all of us. “The ship has a traumatic association for you, and it was wrong of me not to allow for that.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Amen to that,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">I felt it was time I made a contribution. “I don’t think  any of us are about to back out now, Tomas. But maybe—given what we now know about the ship—a little more incentive might go a long way.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I was about to make the same suggestion myself,” Martinez said. “You must appreciate that my funds are not inexhaustible, and that my original offer might already be considered generous . . . but shall we say an extra five thousand Australs, for each of you?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Make it ten and maybe we’re still in business,” Sollis snapped back, before I’d had a chance to blink.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez glanced at Norbert, then—with an expression that suggested he was giving in under duress—he nodded at Sollis. “Ten thousand Australs it is. You drive a hard bargain, Ingrid.”</div>
<div class="tx">“While we’re debating terms,” Nicolosi said, “is there anything else you feel we ought to know?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I have told you that the ship is <i>Nightingale.</i>” Martinez directed our attention back to the sketchy diagram on the wall. “That, I am ashamed to admit, is the sum total of my knowledge of the ship in question.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What about constructional blueprints?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“None survived the war.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Photographs? Video images?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Ditto. <i>Nightingale</i> operated in a war zone, Dexia. Casual sightseeing was not exactly a priority for those unfortunate enough to get close to her.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What about the staff aboard?” Nicolosi asked. “Couldn’t they tell you anything?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I spoke to some survivors: the doctors and technicians who’d been aboard during the commissioning phase. Their testimonies were useful, when they were willing to talk.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi pushed further. “What about the people who were aboard before the ceasefire?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I could not trace them.”</div>
<div class="tx">“But they obviously didn’t die. If the ship’s still out there, the rogue missile couldn’t have hit it.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Why would anyone make up a story about the ship being blown to pieces if it didn’t happen?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“War does strange things to truth,” Martinez answered.  “No malice is necessarily implied. Perhaps another hospital ship was indeed destroyed. There was more than one in orbit around Sky’s Edge, after all. One of them may even have had a similar name. It’s perfectly conceivable that the facts might have got muddled, in the general confusion of those days.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Still doesn’t explain why you couldn’t trace any survivors,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez shifted on his seat, uneasily. “If Jax did appropriate the ship, then he may not have wanted anyone talking about it. The staff aboard <i>Nightingale</i> might have been paid off—or threatened—to keep silent.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Adds up, I guess,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Money will make a lot of things add up,” Nicolosi replied.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">After two days, the <i>Death of Sophonisba</i> sped deeper into the night, while Martinez’s ship followed a pre-programmed flight plan designed to bring us within survey range of the hospital ship. The Ultras had scanned <i>Nightingale</i> again, and once again they’d elicited no detectable response from the dormant vessel. All indications were that the ship was in a deep cybernetic coma, as close to death as possible, with only a handful of critical life-support systems still running on a trickle of stored power.</div>
<div class="tx">Over the next twenty-four hours we crept in closer, narrowing the distance to mere light-seconds, and then down to hundreds of thousands of kilometres. Still there was no response, but as the distance narrowed, so our sensors began to improve the detail in their scans. While the rest of us took turns sleeping, Martinez sat at his console, compositing the data, enhancing his schematic. Now and then Norbert would lean over the console and stare in numb concentration at the sharpening image, and occasionally he would mumble some remark or observation to which Martinez would respond in a patient, faintly condescending whisper, the kind that a teacher might reserve for a slow but willing pupil. Not for the first time I was touched by Martinez’s obvious kindness in employing the huge, slow Norbert, and I  wondered what the war must have done to him to bring him to this state.</div>
<div class="tx">When we were ten hours from docking, Martinez revealed the fruits of his labours. The schematic of the hospital ship was three-dimensional now, displayed in the navigational projection cylinder on the ship’s cramped flight deck. Although the basic layout of the ship hadn’t changed, the new plan was much more detailed than the first one. It showed docking points, airlocks, major mechanical systems and the largest corridors and spaces threading the ship’s interior. There was still a lot of guesswork, but it wouldn’t be as if we were entering completely foreign territory.</div>
<div class="tx">“The biggest thermal hot spot is here,” Martinez said, pointing at an area about a quarter of the way along the vessel from the bow. “If Jax is anywhere, that’s my best guess as to where we’ll find him.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Simple, then,” Nicolosi said. “In via that dorsal lock, then a straight sprint down that access shaft. Easy, even under weightless conditions. Can’t be more than fifty or sixty metres.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m not happy,” Sollis said. “That’s a large lock, likely to be armed to the teeth with heavy-duty sensors and alarms.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Can you get us through it?” Nicolosi asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“You give me a door, I’ll get us through it. But I can’t bypass every conceivable security system, and you can be damned sure the ship will know about it if we come through a main lock.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What about the others?” I asked, trying not to sound as if I was on her case. “Will they be less likely to go off?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Nothing’s guaranteed. I don’t like the idea of spending a minute longer aboard that thing than necessary, but I’d still rather take my chances with the back door.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I think Ingrid is correct,” Martinez said, nodding his approval. “There’s every chance of a silent approach and docking. Jax will have disabled all non-essential systems, including proximity sensors. If that’s the case—if we see  no evidence of having tripped approach alarms—then I believe we would be best advised to maintain stealth.” He indicated further along the hull, beyond the rounded midsection bulge. “That will mean coming in <i>here</i>, or <i>here</i>, via one of these smaller service locks. I concur with Ingrid: they probably won’t be alarmed.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’ll give us four or five hundred metres of ship to crawl through,” Nicolosi said, leaving us in no doubt what he thought about that. “Four or five hundred metres for which we only have a very crude map.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’ll have directional guidance from our suits,” Martinez said.</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s still a concern to me. But if you’ve settled upon this decision, I shall abide by it.”</div>
<div class="tx">I turned to Sollis. “What you said just then—about not spending a minute longer aboard <i>Nightingale</i> than we have to?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I wasn’t kidding.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I know. But there was something about the way you said it. Do you know something about that ship that we don’t? You sounded spooked, and I don’t understand why. It’s just a disused hospital, after all.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis studied me for a moment before answering. “Tell her, Nicolosi.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi looked placidly at the other woman. “Tell her what?”</div>
<div class="tx">“What she obviously doesn’t know. What none of us are in any great hurry to talk about.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Oh, please.”</div>
<div class="tx">“ ‘Oh please’ what?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s just a fairy story, a stupid myth,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">“A stupid story that nonetheless always claimed that <i>Nightingale</i> didn’t get blown up after all,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">“What are you talking about?” I asked. “What story?”</div>
<div class="tx">It was Martinez who chose to answer. “That something unfortunate happened aboard her. That the last batch of sick and injured went in, but for some reason were never seen to leave. That all attempts to contact the technical  staff failed. That an exploratory team was put aboard the ship, and that they too were never heard from again.”</div>
<div class="tx">I laughed. “Fuck. And now we’re planning to go aboard?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Now you see why I’m somewhat anxious to get this over with,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s just a myth,” Martinez chided. “Nothing more. It is a tale to frighten children, not to dissuade us from capturing Jax. In fact, it would not surprise me in the least if Jax or his allies were in some way responsible for this lie. If it were to cause us to turn back now, it would have served them admirably, would it not?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe,” I said, without much conviction. “But I’d still have been happier if you’d told me before. It wouldn’t have made any difference to my accepting this job, but it would have been nice to know you trusted me.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I do trust you, Dexia. I simply assumed that you had no interest in childish stories.”</div>
<div class="tx">“How do you know Jax is aboard?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“We’ve been over this. I have my sources, sources that I must protect, and it would be—”</div>
<div class="tx">“He was a patient, wasn’t he?”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez snapped his glasses from his nose, as if my point had taken an unexpected tangent from whatever we’d been talking about. “I know only that Jax is aboard <i>Nightingale.</i> The circumstances of how he arrived there are of no concern to me.”</div>
<div class="tx">“And it doesn’t bother you that maybe he’s just dead, like whoever else was aboard at the end?” Sollis asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“If he is dead, you will still receive twenty-five thousand Australs.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Plus the extra ten we already agreed on.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That too,” Martinez said, as if it should have been taken for granted.</div>
<div class="tx">“I still don’t like this,” Sollis muttered.</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t like it either,” Nicolosi replied, “but we came here to do a job, and the material facts haven’t changed. There is a ship, and the man we want is aboard it. What Martinez says is true: we should not be intimidated by stories, especially when our goal is so near.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We go in there, we get Jax, we get the hell out,” Sollis said. “No dawdling, no sightseeing, no souvenir-hunting.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I have absolutely no problem with that,” I said.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">“Take what you want,” Martinez called over Norbert’s shoulder as we entered the armoury compartment at the rear of the shuttle’s pressurised section. “But remember: you’ll be wearing pressure suits, and you’ll be moving through confined spaces. You’ll also be aboard a ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis pushed bodily ahead of me, pouncing on something that I’d only begun to notice. She unracked the sleek, cobalt-blue excimer rifle and hefted it for balance. “Hey, a Breitenbach.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Christmas come early?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis pulled a pose, sighting along the rifle, deploying its targeting aids, flipping the power-up toggle. The weapon whined obligingly. Blue lights studded its stock, indicating it was ready for use.</div>
<div class="tx">“Because I’m worth it,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’d really like you to point that thing somewhere else,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Better still, don’t point it anywhere,” Nicolosi rumbled. He’d seen one of the choicer items, too. He unclipped a long, matt-black weapon with a ruby-red dragon stencilled along the barrel. It had a gaping maw like a swallowing python. “Laser-confined plasma bazooka,” he said admiringly. “Naughty, but nice.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Finesse isn’t your cup of tea, then.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Never got to use one of these in the war, Dexia.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s because they were banned. One of the few sensible things both sides managed to agree on.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Now’s my chance.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I think the idea is to extract Jax, not to blow ten-metre-wide holes in <i>Nightingale.</i>”</div>
<div class="tx">“Don’t worry. I’ll be very, very careful.” He slung the bazooka over his shoulder, then continued down the aisle.</div>
<div class="tx">I picked up a pistol, hefted it, replaced it on the rack. Found something more to my liking—a heavy, dual-gripped slug-gun—and flipped open the magazine to check  that there was a full clip inside. Low-tech but reliable: the other two were welcome to their directed-energy weapons, but I’d seen how easily they could go wrong under combat conditions.</div>
<div class="tx">“Nice piece, Dexia,” Sollis said, patronisingly. “Old school.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m old school.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yeah, I noticed.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You have a problem with that, we can always try some target practice.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Hey, no objections. Just glad you found something to your liking. Doing better than old Norbert, anyway.” Sollis nodded over her shoulder. “Looks like he’s really drawn the short straw there.”</div>
<div class="tx">I looked down the aisle. Norbert was near the end of one of the racks, examining a small, stubby-looking weapon whose design I didn’t recognise. In his huge hands it looked ridiculous, like something made for a doll.</div>
<div class="tx">“You sure about that?” I called. “Maybe you want to check out one of these—”</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert looked at me as if I was some kind of idiot. I don’t know what he did then—there was no movement of his hand that I was aware of—but the stubby little weapon immediately unpacked itself, elongating and opening like some complicated puzzle box until it was almost twice as big, twice as deadly-looking. It had the silken, precision-engineered quality of expensive off-world tech. A Demarchist toy, probably, but a very, very deadly toy for all that.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis and I exchanged a wordless glance. Norbert had found what was probably the most advanced, most effective weapon in the room.</div>
<div class="tx">“Will do,” Norbert said, before closing the weapon up again and slipping it into his belt.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">We crept closer. Tens of thousands of kilometres, then thousands, then hundreds. I looked through the hull windows, with the interior lights turned down, peering in the direction where our radar and infrared scans told us the  hospital ship was waiting. When we were down to two dozen kilometres I knew I should be seeing it, but I was still only looking at stars and the sucking blackness between them. I had a sudden, visceral sense of how easy it would be to lose something out here, followed in quick succession by a dizzying sense of how utterly small and alone we were, now that the lighthugger was gone.</div>
<div class="tx">And then, suddenly, there was <i>Nightingale.</i></div>
<div class="tx">We were coming in at an angle, so the hull was tilted and foreshortened. It was so dark that only certain edges and surfaces were visible at all. No windows, no running lights, no lit-up docking bays. The ship looked as dark and dead as a sliver of coal. Suddenly it was absurd to think that there might be anyone alive aboard it. Colonel Jax’s corpse, perhaps, but not the living or even life-supported body that would guarantee us full payment.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez had the ship on manual control now. With small, deft applications of thrust he narrowed the distance down to less than a dozen kilometres. At six kilometres, Martinez deemed it safe to activate floodlights and play them along the length of the hull, confirming the placement of locks and docking sites. There was a peppering of micrometeorite impacts and some scorching from high-energy particles, but nothing I wouldn’t have expected on a ship that had been sitting out there since the armistice. If the ship possessed self-repair mechanisms, they were sleeping as well. Even when we circled around the hull and swept it from the other side, there was no hint of our having been noticed. Still reluctant, Nicolosi accepted that we would follow Sollis’s entry strategy, entering via one of the smaller service locks.</div>
<div class="tx">It was time to do it.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">We docked. We came in softly, but there was still a solid <i>clunk</i> as the capture latches engaged and grasped our little craft to the hull of the hospital ship. I thought of that <i>clunk</i> echoing away down the length of <i>Nightingale</i>, diminishing as it travelled, but potentially still significant enough to trip some waiting, infinitely patient alarm system, alerting the  sleeping ship that it had a visitor. For several minutes we hung in weightless silence, staring out of the windows or watching the sensor read-outs for the least sign of activity. But the dark ship stayed dark in all directions. There was no detectable change in her state of coma.</div>
<div class="tx">“Nothing’s happened,” Martinez said, breaking the silence with a whisper. “It still doesn’t know we’re here. The lock is all yours, Ingrid. I’ve already opened our doors.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis, suited-up now, moved into the lock tube with her toolkit. While she worked, the rest of us finished putting on our own suits and armour, completing the exercise as quietly as possible. I hadn’t worn a spacesuit before, but Norbert was there to help all of us with the unfamiliar process: his huge hands attended to delicate connections and catches with surprising dexterity. Once I had the suit on, it didn’t feel much different from wearing full-spectrum bioarmour, and I quickly got the hang of the life-support indicators projected around the border of my faceplate. I would only need to pay minor attention to them: unless there was some malfunction, the suit had enough power and supplies to keep me alive in perfect comfort for three days; longer if I was prepared to tolerate a little less comfort. None of us were planning on spending anywhere near that long aboard <i>Nightingale.</i></div>
<div class="tx">Sollis was nearly done when we assembled behind her in the lock. The inner and outer lock doors on our side were open, exposing the grey outer door of the hospital ship, held tight against the docking connector by pressure-tight seals. I doubted that she’d ever had to break into a ship before, but nothing about the mechanism appeared to be causing Sollis any difficulties. She’d tugged open an access panel and plugged in a fistful of coloured cables, running back to a jury-rigged electronics module in her toolkit. She was tapping a little keyboard, causing patterns of lights to alter within the access panel. The face of a woman—blank, expressionless, yet at the same time somehow severe and unforgiving—had appeared in an oval frame above the access panel.</div>
<div class="tx">“Who’s that?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s <i>Nightingale</i>,” Sollis said, adding, by way of explanation, “The ship had its own gamma-level personality, keeping the whole show running. Pretty smart piece of thinkware by all accounts: full Turing compliance; about as clever as you can make a machine before you have to start giving it human rights.”</div>
<div class="tx">I looked at the stern-faced woman, expecting her to query us at any moment. I imagined her harsh and hectoring voice demanding to know what business any of us had boarding <i>Nightingale</i>, trespassing aboard <i>her</i> ship, <i>her</i> hospital.</div>
<div class="tx">“Does she know . . .” I started.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis shook her head. “This is just a dumb facet of the main construct. Not only is it inactive—the image is frozen into the door’s memory—but it doesn’t appear to have any functioning data links back to the main sentience engine. Do you, <i>Nightingale</i>?”</div>
<div class="tx">The face gazed at us impassively, but still said nothing.</div>
<div class="tx">“See: deadsville. My guess is the sentience engine isn’t running at all. Out here, the ship wouldn’t need much more than a trickle of intelligence to keep itself ticking over.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So the gamma’s off-line?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Uh-huh. Best way, too. You don’t want one of those things sitting around too long without something to do.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Why not?”</div>
<div class="tx">“’Cause they tend to go nuts. That’s why the Conjoiners won’t allow gamma-level intelligences in any of their machines. They say it’s a kind of slavery.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Running a hospital must have been enough to stop <i>Nightingale</i>’s gamma running off the rails.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Let’s hope so. Let’s really hope so.” Sollis glanced back at her work, then emitted a grunt of satisfaction as a row of lights flicked to orange. She unplugged a bunch of coloured cables and looked back at the waiting party. “Okay: we’re good to go. I can open the door any time you’re ready.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What’s on the other side of it?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“According to the door, air: normal trimix. Bitchingly cold, but not frozen. Pressure’s manageable. I’m not sure we could <i>breathe</i> it, but—”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re not breathing anything,” Martinez said curtly. “Our airlock will take two people. One of them will have to be you, Ingrid, since you know how to work the mechanism. I shall accompany you, and then we shall wait for the others on the far side, when we have established that conditions are safe.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe one of us should go through instead of you,” I said, wondering why Norbert hadn’t volunteered to go through ahead of his master. “We’re expendable, but you aren’t. Without you, Jax doesn’t go down.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Considerate of you, Dexia, but I paid you to assist me, not take risks on my behalf.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez propelled himself forward. Norbert, Nicolosi and I edged back to permit the inner door to close again. On the common suit channel I heard Sollis say, “We’re opening <i>Nightingale.</i>  Stand by: comms might get a bit weaker once we’re on the other side of all this metal.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi pushed past me, back into the flight deck. I heard the heavy whine of servos as the door opened. Breathing and scuffling sounds followed, but nothing that alarmed me.</div>
<div class="tx">“Okay,” Sollis said, “we’re moving into <i>Nightingale</i>’s lock. Closing the outer door behind us. When you need to open it again, hit any key on the pad.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Still no sign of life,” Nicolosi called.</div>
<div class="tx">“The inner door looks as if it’ll open without any special encouragement from me,” Sollis said. “Should be just a matter of pulling down this lever . . . you ready?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Do it, Ingrid,” Martinez replied.</div>
<div class="tx">More servos, fainter now. After a few moments, Sollis reported back: “We’re inside. No surprises yet. Floating in some kind of holding bay, about ten metres wide. It’s dark, of course. There’s a doorway leading out through the far wall: might lead to the main corridor that should pass close to this lock.”</div>
<div class="tx">I remembered to turn on my helmet lamp.</div>
<div class="tx">“Can you open both lock doors?” Nicolosi asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Not at the same time, not without a lot of trouble that might get us noticed.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then we’ll come through in two passes. Norbert: you go first. Dexia and I will follow.”</div>
<div class="tx">It took longer than I’d have liked, but eventually all five of us were on the other side of the lock. I’d only been weightless once, during the recuperation programme after my injury, but the memory of how to move—at least without making too much of a fool of myself—was still there, albeit dimly. The others were coping about as well. The combined effects of our helmet lamps banished the darkness to the corners of the room, emphasizing the deeper gloom of the open doorway Sollis had mentioned. It occurred to me that somewhere deep in that darkness was Colonel Jax, or whatever was left of him.</div>
<div class="tx">Nervously, I checked that the slug-gun was still clipped to my belt.</div>
<div class="tx">“Call up your helmet maps,” Martinez said. “Does everyone have an overlay and a positional fix?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m good,” I said, against a chorus from the other three, and acutely aware of how easy it would be to get lost aboard a ship as large as <i>Nightingale</i> if that positional fix were to break down.</div>
<div class="tx">“Check your weapons and suit systems. We’ll keep comms to a minimum all the way in.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’ll lead,” Nicolosi said, propelling himself into the darkness of the doorway before anyone could object.</div>
<div class="tx">I followed hard on his heels, trying not to get out of breath with the effort of keeping up. There were loops and rails along all four walls of the shaft, so movement consisted of gliding from one handhold to the next, with only air resistance to stop one drifting all the way. We were covering one metre a second, easily: at that rate, it wouldn’t take long to cross the entire width of the ship, which would mean we’d somehow missed the axial corridor we were looking for, or that it simply didn’t exist. But just when it was beginning to strike me that we’d gone too far, Nicolosi slowed. I grabbed a handhold to stop myself slamming into his feet.</div>
<div class="tx">He looked back at us, his helmet lamp making me  squint. “Here’s the main corridor, just a bit deeper than we were expecting. Runs both ways.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We turn left,” Martinez said, in not much more than a whisper. “Turn left and follow it for one hundred metres, maybe one hundred and twenty, until we meet the centrifuge section. It should be a straight crawl, with no obstructions.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi turned away, then looked back. “I can’t see more than twenty metres into the corridor. We may as well see where it goes.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Nice and slowly,” Martinez urged.</div>
<div class="tx">We moved forward, along the length of the hull. In the instants when I was coasting from one handhold to the next, I held my breath and tried to hear the ambient noises of the ship, relayed to my helmet by the suit’s acoustic pick-up. Mostly all I heard was the scuffing progress of the others, the hiss and hum of their own life-support packs. Other than that, <i>Nightingale</i> was as silent as when we’d approached. If the ship was aware of our intrusion, there was no sign of it.</div>
<div class="tx">We’d made maybe forty metres from the junction—at least a third of the distance we had to travel before hitting the centrifuge—when Nicolosi slowed. I caught a handhold before I drifted into his heels, then looked back to make sure the others had got the message.</div>
<div class="tx">“Problem?” Martinez asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“There’s a T-junction right ahead. I didn’t think we were expecting a T-junction.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We weren’t,” Martinez said, “but it shouldn’t surprise us that the real ship deviates from the schematic here and there. As long as we don’t reach a dead end, we can still keep moving towards the colonel.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You want to flip a coin, or shall I do it?” Nicolosi said, looking back at us over his shoulder, his face picked out by my helmet light.</div>
<div class="tx">“There’s no indication, no sign on the wall?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Blank either way.”</div>
<div class="tx">“In which case take the left,” Martinez said, before glancing at Norbert. “Agreed?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Agreed,” the big man said. “Take left, then next right. Continue.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi kicked off, and the rest of us followed. I kept an eye on my helmet’s inertial compass, gratified when it detected our change of direction, even though the overlay now showed us moving through what should have been a solid wall.</div>
<div class="tx">We’d moved twenty or thirty metres when Nicolosi slowed again. “Tunnel bends to the right,” he reported. “Looks like we’re back on track. Everyone cool with this?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Cool,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">But we’d only made another fifteen or twenty metres of progress along the new course when Nicolosi slowed and called back again. “We’re coming up on a heavy door—some kind of internal airlock. Looks as if we’re going to need Sollis again.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Let me through,” she said, and I squeezed aside so she could edge past me, trying to avoid knocking our suits together. In addition to the weapons she’d selected from the armoury, Sollis’s suit was also hung with all manner of door-opening tools, clattering against each other as she moved. I didn’t doubt that she’d be able to get through any kind of door, given time. But the idea of spending hours inside <i>Nightingale</i>, while we inched from one obstruction to the next, didn’t exactly fill me with enthusiasm.</div>
<div class="tx">We let Sollis examine the door: we could hear her ruminating over the design, tutting, humming and talking softly to herself under her breath. She had panels open and equipment plugged in, just like before. The same unwelcoming face glowered from an oval display.</div>
<div class="tx">After a couple of minutes, Martinez sighed and asked, “Is there a problem, Ingrid?”</div>
<div class="tx">“There’s no problem. I can get this door open in about ten seconds. I just want to make damned sure this is another of <i>Nightingale</i>’s dumb facets. That means sensing the electrical connections on either side of the frame. Of course, if you’d rather we just stormed on through—”</div>
<div class="tx">“Keep voice down,” Norbert rumbled.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m wearing a spacesuit, dickhead.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Pressure outside. Sound travel, air to glass, glass to air.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You have five minutes,” Martinez said, decisively. “If you haven’t found what you’re looking for by then, we open the door anyway. And Norbert’s right: let’s keep the noise down.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So, no pressure then,” Sollis muttered.</div>
<div class="tx">But in three minutes she started unplugging her tools, and turned aside with a beaming look on her face. “It’s just an emergency airlock, in case this part of the ship depressurises.”</div>
<div class="tx">“But it isn’t on the schematic.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It ain’t a blueprint, Scarrow. Like the old man told us, it’s just a guess. If people remembered stuff wrong, or if the ship got changed after they were abroad . . . we’re going to run into discrepancies.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No danger that tripping it will alert the rest of <i>Nightingale</i> ?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Can’t ever say there’s no risk, but I’m happy for us to go through.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Open the door,” Martinez said. “Everyone brace in case there’s vacuum or atmosphere under pressure on the other side.”</div>
<div class="tx">We followed his instructions, but when the door opened the air remained as still as before. Beyond, picked out by our wavering lights, was a short stretch of corridor terminating in an identical-looking door. This time there was enough room for all of us to squeeze through, while Sollis attended to the second lock mechanism. Some hardwired system required that the first door be closed before the second one could be opened, but that posed us no real difficulties. Now that Sollis knew what to look for, she worked much faster: good at her job and happy for us all to know it. I didn’t doubt that she’d be even faster on the way out.</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re ready to go through, people. Indications say that the air’s just as cold on the other side, so keep your suits buttoned.”</div>
<div class="tx">I heard the click as one of us—maybe Nicolosi, maybe Norbert—released a safety catch. It was like someone  coughing in a theatre. I had no choice but to reach down and arm my own weapon.</div>
<div class="tx">“Open it,” Martinez said quietly.</div>
<div class="tx">The door chugged wide. Our lights stabbed into dark emptiness beyond: a suggestion of a much deeper, wider space than I’d been expecting. Sollis leaned through the doorframe, her helmet lamp catching fleeting details from reflective surfaces. I had a momentary flash of glassy things stretching away into infinite distance, then it was gone.</div>
<div class="tx">“Report, Ingrid,” Martinez said.</div>
<div class="tx">“I think we can get through. We’ve come out next to a wall, or floor, or whatever it is. There are handholds, railings. Looks as if they lead on into the room, probably to the other side.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Stay where you are,” Nicolosi said, just ahead of me. “I’ll take point again.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis glanced back and swallowed hard. “It’s okay, I can handle this one. Can’t let you have all the fun, can I?”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi grunted something: I don’t think he had much of a sense of humour. “You’re welcome to my gun, you want it.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m cool,” she said, but with audible hesitation. I didn’t blame her: it was different being point on a walk through a huge dark room, compared to a narrow corridor. Nothing could leap out and grab you from the side in a corridor.</div>
<div class="tx">She started moving along the crawlway.</div>
<div class="tx">“Nice and slowly, Ingrid,” Martinez said, from behind me. “We still have time on our side.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re right behind you,” I said, feeling she needed moral support.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m fine, Dexia. No problems here. Just don’t want to lose my handhold and go drifting off into fuck knows what . . .”</div>
<div class="tx">Her movements became rhythmic, progressing into the chamber one careful handhold at a time. Nicolosi followed, with me right behind him. Apart from our movements, and the sounds of our suit systems, the ship was still as silent as a crypt.</div>
<div class="tx">But it wasn’t totally dark any more.</div>
<div class="tx">Now that we were inside the chamber, it began to reveal its secrets in dim spots of pale light, reaching away into some indeterminate distance. The lights must have always been there, just too faint to notice until we were inside.</div>
<div class="tx">“Something’s running,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">“We knew that,” Martinez said. “It was always clear that the ship was dormant, not dead.”</div>
<div class="tx">I panned my helmet around and tried to get another look at the glassy things I’d glimpsed earlier. On either side of the railed walkway, stretching away in multiple ranks, were hundreds of transparent flasks. Each flask was the size of an oil drum, rounded on top, mounted on a steel-grey plinth equipped with controls, read-outs and input sockets. There were three levels of them, with the second and third layers stacked above the first on skeletal racks. Most of the plinths were dead, but maybe one in ten was showing a lit-up read-out.</div>
<div class="tx">“Oh, Jesus,” Sollis said, and I guess she’d seen what I’d just seen: that the flasks contained human organs, floating in a green chemical solution, wired up with fine nutrient lines and electrical cables. I was no anatomist, but I still recognised hearts, lungs, kidneys, snakelike coils of intestine. And there were things anyone would have recognised: things like eyeballs, dozens of them growing in a single vat, swaying on the long stalks of optic nerves like some weird species of all-seeing sea anemone; things like hands, or entire limbs, or genitals, or the skin and muscle masks of eyeless faces. Every external body part came in dozens of different sizes, ranging from child-sized to adult, male and female, and despite the green suspension fluid one could make out subtle variations in skin tone and pigmentation.</div>
<div class="tx">“Easy, Ingrid,” I said, the words as much for my benefit as hers. “We always knew this was a hospital ship. It was just a matter of time before we ran into something like this.”</div>
<div class="tx">“This stuff . . .” Nicolosi said, his voice low. “Where does it come from?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Two main sources,” Martinez answered, sounding too calm for my liking. “Not everyone who came aboard <i>Nightingale</i> could be saved, obviously—the ship was no more capable of working miracles than any other hospital. Wherever practicable, the dead would donate intact body parts for future use. Useful, certainly, but such a resource could never have supplied the bulk of <i>Nightingale’</i>s surgical needs. For that reason the ship was also equipped to fabricate its own organ supplies, using well-established principles of stem-cell manipulation. The organ factories would have worked around the clock, keeping this library fully stocked.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It doesn’t look fully stocked now,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez said, “We’re not in a war zone any more. The ship is dormant. It has no need to maintain its usual surgical capacity.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So why is it maintaining any capacity? Why are some of these flasks still keeping their organs alive?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Waste not, want not, I suppose. A strategic reserve, against the day when the ship might be called into action again.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You think it’s just waiting to be reactivated?”</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s only a machine, Dexia. A machine on standby. Nothing to get nervous about.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No one’s nervous,” I said, but it came out all wrong, making me sound as if I was the one who was spooked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Let’s get to the other side,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re halfway there,” Sollis reported. “I can see the far wall, sort of. Looks like there’s a door waiting for us.”</div>
<div class="tx">We kept on moving, hand over hand, mostly in silence. Surrounded by all those glass-encased body parts, I couldn’t help but think of the people many of them had once been part of. If these parts had belonged to me, I think I’d have chosen to haunt <i>Nightingale</i>, consumed with ill-directed, spiteful fury.</div>
<div class="tx">Not the right kind of thinking, I was just telling myself, when the flasks started moving.</div>
<div class="tx">We all stopped, anchoring ourselves to the nearest handhold. Two or three rows back from the railed crawlway, a  row of flasks was gliding smoothly towards the far wall of the chamber. They were sliding in perfect lock-step unison. When my heart started beating again, I realised that the entire row must be attached to some kind of conveyor system, hidden within the support framework.</div>
<div class="tx">“Nobody move,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">“This is not good,” Sollis kept saying. “This is not good. The damn ship isn’t supposed to know—”</div>
<div class="tx">“Quiet,” Martinez hissed. “Let me past you: I want to see where those flasks are going.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Careful,” Norbert said.</div>
<div class="tx">Paying no attention to the man, Martinez climbed ahead of the party. Quickly we followed him, doing our best not to make any noise or slip from the crawlway. The flasks continued their smooth, silent movement until the conveyor system reached the far wall and turned through ninety degrees, taking the flasks away from us into a covered enclosure like a security scanner. Most of the flasks were empty, but as we watched, one of the occupied, active units slid into the enclosure. I’d only had a moment to notice, but I thought I’d seen a forearm and hand, reaching up from the life-support plinth.</div>
<div class="tx">The conveyor system halted. For a moment all was silent, then there came a series of mechanical clicks and whirrs. None of us could see what was happening inside the enclosure, but after a moment we didn’t need to. It was obvious.</div>
<div class="tx">The conveyor began to move again, but running in reverse this time. The flask that had gone into the enclosure was now empty. I counted back to make sure I wasn’t making a mistake, but there was no doubt. The forearm and hand had been removed from the flask. Already, I presumed, the limb was somewhere else in the ship.</div>
<div class="tx">The flasks travelled back—returning to what I presumed to have been their former positions—and then halted again. Save for the missing limb, the chamber was exactly as when we had entered it.</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t like this,” Sollis said. “The ship is supposed to be dead.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Dormant,” Martinez corrected.</div>
<div class="tx">“You don’t think the shit that just happened is in any way related to us being aboard? You don’t think Jax just got a wake-up call?”</div>
<div class="tx">“If Jax were aware of our presence, we’d know it by now.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know how you can sound so calm.”</div>
<div class="tx">“All that has happened, Ingrid, is that <i>Nightingale</i> has performed some trivial housekeeping duty. We have already seen that it maintains some organs in pre-surgical condition, and this is just one of its tissue libraries. It should hardly surprise us that the ship occasionally decides to move some of its stock from A to B.”</div>
<div class="tx">She made a small, catlike snarl of frustration—I could tell she hadn’t bought any of his explanations—and pulled herself hand over hand to the door.</div>
<div class="tx">“Any more shit like that happens, I’m out,” she said.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’d think twice if I were you,” Martinez said, “It’s a hell of a long walk home.”</div>
<div class="tx">I caught up with Sollis and touched her on the forearm. “I don’t like it either, Ingrid, but the man’s right. Jax doesn’t know we’re here. If he did, I think he’d do more than just move some flasks around.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I hope you’re right, Scarrow.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So do I,” I said under my breath.</div>
<div class="tx">We continued along the main axis of the ship, following a corridor much like the one we’d been following before the organ library. It swerved and jagged, then straightened out again. According to the inertial compasses, we were still headed towards Jax, or at least the part of the ship where it appeared most likely we’d find him, alive or dead.</div>
<div class="tx">“What we were talking about earlier,” Sollis said, “I mean, much earlier—about how this ship never got destroyed at the end of the war after all—”</div>
<div class="tx">“I think I have stated my case, Ingrid. Dwelling on myths won’t bring a wanted man to justice.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re looking at about a million tonnes of salvageable spacecraft here. Gotta be worth something to someone. So why didn’t anyone get their hands on it after the war?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Because something bad happened,” Nicolosi said.  “Maybe there was some truth in the story about that boarding party coming here and not leaving.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Oh, please,” Martinez said.</div>
<div class="tx">“So who was fighting back?” I asked. “Who stopped them taking <i>Nightingale</i>?”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi answered me. “The skeleton staff . . . security agents of the postmortals who financed this thing . . . maybe even the protective systems of the ship itself. If it thought it was under attack—”</div>
<div class="tx">“If there was some kind of firefight aboard this thing,” I asked, “where’s the damage?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t care about the damage,” Sollis cut in. “I want to know what happened to all the bodies.”</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">We came to another blocked double-door airlock. Sollis got to work on it immediately, but my expectation that she would work faster now that she had already opened several doors without trouble was wrong. She kept plugging things in, checking read-outs, murmuring to herself just loud enough to carry over the voice link. <i>Nightingale’</i>s face watched us disapprovingly, looking on like the portrait of a disappointed ancestor.</div>
<div class="tx">“This one could be trickier,” she said. “I’m picking up active data links, running away from the frame.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Meaning it could still be hooked into the nervous system?” Nicolosi asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“I can’t rule it out.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi ran a hand along the smooth black barrel of his plasma weapon. “We could double back, try a different route.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re not going back,” Martinez said. “Not now. Open the door, Ingrid: we’ll take our chances and move as quickly as we can from now on.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You sure about this?” She had a cable pinched between her fingers. “No going back once I plug this in.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Do it.”</div>
<div class="tx">She pushed the line in. At the same moment a shiver of animation passed across <i>Nightingale’</i>s face, the mask waking  to life. The door spoke to us. Its tone was strident and metallic, but also possessed of an authoritative femininity.</div>
<div class="tx">“This is the Voice of <i>Nightingale.</i>  You are attempting to access a secure area. Report to central administration to obtain proper clearance.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Shit,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">“You weren’t expecting that?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“I wasn’t expecting an active facet. Maybe the sentience engine isn’t powered down quite as far as I thought.”</div>
<div class="tx">“This is the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i>,” the door said again. “You are attempting to access a secure area. Report to central administration to obtain proper clearance.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Can you still force it?” Nicolosi asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Yeah . . . think so.” Sollis fumbled in another line, made some adjustments and stood back as the door slid open. <i>“Voilà.”</i></div>
<div class="tx">The face had turned silent and masklike again, but now I really felt as if we were being watched; as if the woman’s eyes seemed to be looking in all directions at once.</div>
<div class="tx">“You think Jax knows about us now?” I asked, as Sollis propelled herself into the holding chamber between the two sets of doors.</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know. Maybe I bypassed the door in time, before it sent an alert.”</div>
<div class="tx">“But you can’t be sure.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No.” She sounded wounded.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis got to work on the second door, faster now, urgency overruling caution. I checked that my gun was still where I’d left it, and then made sure that the safety catch was still off. Around me, the others went through similar preparatory rituals.</div>
<div class="tx">Gradually it dawned on me that Sollis was taking longer than expected. She turned from the door, her equipment still hooked into its open service panel.</div>
<div class="tx">“Something’s screwed up,” she said, before swallowing hard. “These suits we’re wearing, Tomas . . . how good are they, exactly?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Full-spectrum battle-hardened. Why do you ask?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Because the door says that the ship’s flooded behind this point. It says we’ll be swimming through something.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I see,” Martinez said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Oh, no,” I said, shaking my head. “We’re not doing this. We’re not going underwater.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I can’t be sure it’s water, Dexia.” She tapped the readout panel, as if I should have been able to make sense of the numbers and symbols. “Could be anything warm and wet, really.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez shrugged within his suit. “Could have been a containment leak . . . spillage into this part of the ship. It’s nothing to worry about. Our suits will cope easily, provided we do not delay.”</div>
<div class="tx">I looked him hard in the faceplate, meeting his eyes, making certain he couldn’t look away. “You’re sure about this? These suits aren’t going to stiff on us as soon as they get wet?”</div>
<div class="tx">“The suits will continue to function. I am so certain that I will go first. When you hear that I am safe on the other side, you can all follow.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t like this. What if Ingrid’s tools don’t work under water?”</div>
<div class="tx">“We have no choice but to keep moving forward,” Martinez said. “If this section of the ship is flooded, we’ll run into it no matter which route we take. This is the only way.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then let’s do it,” I said. “If these suits made it through the war, surely they’ll get us through the next chamber.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s not the suits I’m worried about,” Nicolosi said, examining his weapon again. “No one mentioned immersion when we were in the armoury.”</div>
<div class="tx">I cupped a hand to my crude little slug-gun. “I’ll swap you, we make it to the other side.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi didn’t say anything. I don’t think he saw the funny side.</div>
<div class="tx">Two minutes later we were inside, floating weightless in the unlit gloom of the flooded room. It felt like water, but it was difficult to tell. Everything felt thick and sluggish when you were wearing a suit, even thin air. My biohazard detectors weren’t registering anything, but that didn’t necessarily  mean the fluid was safe. The detectors were tuned to recognise a handful of toxins in common wartime use; they weren’t designed to sniff out every harmful agent that had ever existed.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez’s voice buzzed in my helmet. “There are no handholds or guide wires. We’ll just have to swim in a straight direction, trusting to our inertial compasses. If we all stay within sight of each other, we should have no difficulties.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Let’s get on with it,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">We started swimming as best as we could, Nicolosi leading, pushing himself forward with powerful strokes, his weapons dangling from their straps. It would have been hard and slow with just the suits to contend with, but we were all wearing armour as well. It made it difficult to see ahead; difficult to reach forward to get an effective stroke; difficult to kick our legs enough to make any useful contribution. Our helmet lamps struggled to illuminate more than ten or twenty metres in any direction, and the door by which we’d entered was soon lost behind us in gloom. I felt a constricting sense of panic: the fear that if the compasses failed we might never find our way out again.</div>
<div class="tx">The compasses didn’t fail, though, and Nicolosi maintained his unfaltering pace. Two minutes into the swim he called, “I see the wall. It’s dead ahead of us.”</div>
<div class="tx">A couple of seconds later I saw it hove out of the deep-pink gloom. Any relief I might have felt was tempered by the observation that the wall appeared featureless, stretching away blankly in all illuminated directions.</div>
<div class="tx">“There’s no door,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe we experienced some lateral drift,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Compass says no.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then maybe the doors are offset. It doesn’t matter: we’ll find it by hitting the wall and spiralling out from our landing spot.”</div>
<div class="tx">“If there’s a door.”</div>
<div class="tx">“If there isn’t,” Nicolosi said, “we shoot our way out.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Glad you’ve thought this through,” I said, realising that he was serious.</div>
<div class="tx">We drew nearer to the wall. The closer we got and the more clearly it was picked out by our lamps, the more I realised there was something not quite right about it. It was still blank—lacking any struts or panels, apertures or pieces of shipboard equipment—but it wasn’t the seamless surface I’d have expected from a massive sheet of prefabricated spacecraft material. There was an unsettling texture to it, with something of the fibrous quality of cheap paper. Faint lines coursed through it, slightly darker than the rest of the wall, but not arranged according to any neat geometric pattern. They curved and branched, and threw off fainter subsidiary lines, diminishing like the veins in a leaf.</div>
<div class="tx">In a nauseating flash I realised exactly what the wall was made of. When Nicolosi’s palms touched the surface, it yielded like a trampoline, absorbing the momentum of his impact and then sending him back out again, until his motion was damped by the surrounding fluid.</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s . . .” I began.</div>
<div class="tx">“Skin. I know. I realised just before I hit.”</div>
<div class="tx">I arrested my motion, but not quickly enough to avoid contact with the wall of skin. It yielded under me, stretching so much that I felt in danger of ripping my way right through. But it held, and began to trampoline me back in the direction I’d come from. Fighting a tide of revulsion, I pulled back into the liquid and floated amidst the others.</div>
<div class="tx">“Fuck,” Sollis said. “This isn’t right. There shouldn’t be fucking <i>skin</i>—”</div>
<div class="tx">“Don’t be alarmed,” Martinez said, wheezing between each word. “This is just another form of organ library, like the room we already passed through. I believe the liquid we’re swimming in must be a form of growth-support medium . . . something like amniotic fluid. Under wartime conditions, this whole chamber would have been full of curtains of growing skin, measured by the acre.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi groped for something on his belt, came up with a serrated blade that glinted nastily even in the pink fluid.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m cutting through.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No!” Martinez barked.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis, who was next to Nicolosi, took hold of his forearm. “Easy, soldier. Got to be a better way.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There is,” Martinez said. “Put the knife away, please. We can go around the skin, find its edge.”</div>
<div class="tx">Nicolosi still had the blade in his hand. “I’d rather take the short cut.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There are nerve endings in that skin. Cut them and the monitoring apparatus will know about it. Then so will the ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe the ship already knows we’re here.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We don’t take that chance.”</div>
<div class="tx">Reluctantly, Nicolosi returned the knife to his belt. “I thought we’d agreed to move fast from now on,” he said.</div>
<div class="tx">“There’s fast, and there’s reckless,” Sollis said. “You were about to cross the line.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez brushed past me, already swimming to the left. I followed him, with the others tagging on behind. After less than a minute of hard progress, a dark edge emerged into view. It was like a picture frame stretching tight the canvas of skin. Beyond the edge, only just visible, was a wall of the chamber, fretted with massive geodesic reinforcing struts.</div>
<div class="tx">I allowed myself a moment of ease. We were still in danger, still in about the most claustrophobic situation I could imagine, but at least now the chamber didn’t seem infinitely large.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez braked himself by grabbing the frame. I came to rest next to him and peered around the edge, towards what I hoped would be the wall we’d been heading towards all along. But instead of that I saw only another field of skin, stretched across another frame, separated from the first by no more than the height of a man. In the murky distance was the suggestion of a third frame, and perhaps a fourth beyond that.</div>
<div class="tx">“How many?” I asked as the others arrived on the frame, perching like crows.</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know,” Martinez said. “Four, five . . . anything up to a dozen, I’d guess. But it’s okay. We can swim around the frames, then turn right and head back to where we’d expect  to find the exit door.” He raised his voice. “Everyone all right? No problems with your suits?”</div>
<div class="tx">“There are lights,” Nicolosi said quietly.</div>
<div class="tx">We turned to look at him.</div>
<div class="tx">“I mean over there,” he added, nodding in the direction of the other sheets of skin. “I saw a flicker of something . . . a glow in the water, or amniotic fluid, or whatever the fuck this is.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I see light, too,” Norbert said.</div>
<div class="tx">I looked down and saw that he was right—Nicolosi had not been imagining it. A pale, trembling light was emerging from between the next two layers of skin.</div>
<div class="tx">“Whatever that is, I don’t like it,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Me neither,” Martinez said. “But if it’s something going on between the skin layers, it doesn’t have to concern us. We swim around, avoid them completely.”</div>
<div class="tx">He kicked off with surprising determination, and I followed quickly after him. The reverse side of the skin sheet was a fine mesh of pale support fibres, the structural matrix upon which the skin must have been grown and nourished. Thick black cables ran across the underside, arranged in circuit-like patterns.</div>
<div class="tx">The second sheet, the one immediately behind the first, was of different pigmentation from the one behind it. In all other respects it appeared similar, stretching unbroken into pink haze. The flickering, trembling light source was visible through the flesh, silhouetting the veins and arteries at the moments when the light was brightest.</div>
<div class="tx">We passed around the second sheet and peered into the gap between the second and third layers. Picked out in stuttering light was a tableau of furtive activity. Four squid-like robots were at work. Each machine consisted of a tapering, cone-shaped body, anchored to the skin by a cluster of whip-like arms emerging from the blunt end of the cone. The robots were engaged in precise surgery, removing a blanket-sized rectangle of skin by cutting it free along four sides. The robots generated their own illumination, shining from the ends of some of their arms, but the bright flashing light was coming from some kind of laser-like  tool that each robot deployed on the end of a single segmented arm that was thicker than any of the others. I couldn’t tell whether the flashes were part of the cutting, or the instant healing that appeared to be taking place immediately afterwards. There was no bleeding, and the surrounding skin appeared unaffected.</div>
<div class="tx">“What are they doing?” I breathed.</div>
<div class="tx">“Harvesting,” Martinez answered. “What does it look like?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I know they’re harvesting. I mean, <i>why</i> are they doing it? What do they need that skin for?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You had plenty of answers in the organ library, Mister Martinez,” Sollis said. All five of us had slowed, hovering at the same level as the surgical robots. “For a ship that’s supposed to be dormant . . . I’m not seeing much fucking evidence of dormancy.”</div>
<div class="tx">“<i>Nightingale</i> grows skin here,” I said. “I can deal with that. The ship’s keeping a basic supply going, in case it’s called into another war. But that doesn’t explain why it needs to harvest some <i>now.</i>”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez sounded vague. “Maybe it’s testing the skin . . . making sure it’s developing according to plan.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’d think a little sample would be enough for that,” I said. “A lot less than several square metres, for sure. That’s enough skin to cover a whole person.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I really wish you hadn’t said that,” Nicolosi said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Let’s keep moving,” Martinez said. And he was right, too, I thought: the activity of the robots was deeply unsettling, but we hadn’t come here to sightsee.</div>
<div class="tx">As we swam away—with no sign that the robots had noticed us—I thought about what Ingrid Sollis had said before. About how it wasn’t clever to leave a gamma-level intelligence up and running without something to occupy itself. Because otherwise—since duty was so deeply hard-wired into their logic pathways—they tended to go slowly, quietly, irrevocably insane.</div>
<div class="tx">And <i>Nightingale</i> had been alone out there since the end of the war. What did that mean for its controlling mind?  Was the hospital running itself out there—reliving the duties of its former life, no matter how pointless they had become—because the mind had already gone mad, or was this the hospital’s last-ditch way of keeping itself sane?</div>
<div class="tx">And what, I wondered, did any of that have to do with the man we had come here to find in the first place?</div>
<div class="tx">We kept swimming, passing layer upon layer of skin. Now and then we’d come across another surgical party: another group of robots engaged in skin-harvesting. Where they’d already completed their task, the flesh had been excised in neat rectangles and strips, exposing the gauzelike mesh of the growth matrix. Occasionally I saw a patch that was half-healed already, the skin growing back in rice-paper translucence. By the time it was fully repaired, I doubted that there’d be any sign of where the skin had been cut.</div>
<div class="tx">Ten layers, then twelve—and then finally the wall I’d been waiting for hove into view like a mirage. But I wasn’t imagining it, or seeing another layer of drum-tight skin. There was the same pattern of geodesic struts as I’d seen on the other wall.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis’s voice came through. “Got a visual on the door, people. We’re nearly out of here. I’m swimming ahead to start work.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Good, Ingrid,” Martinez called back.</div>
<div class="tx">A few seconds later I saw the airlock for myself, relieved that Sollis hadn’t been mistaken. She swam quickly, then—even as she was gliding to a halt by the door—commenced unclipping tools and connectors from her belt. Through the darkening distance of the pink haze I watched her flip down the service panel and begin her usual systems-bypass procedure. I was glad Martinez had found Sollis. Whatever else one might say about her, she was pretty hot at getting through doors.</div>
<div class="tx">“Okay, good news,” she said after a minute of plugging things in and out. “There’s air on the other side. We’re not going to have to swim in this stuff for much longer.”</div>
<div class="tx">“How much longer?” Nicolosi asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Can’t risk a short circuit here, guy. Gotta take things one step at a time.”</div>
<div class="tx">Just as she was saying that, I became aware that we were casting shadows against the wall—shadows we hadn’t been casting when we arrived. I twisted around and looked back the way we’d just swum, in the direction of the new light source I knew had to be there. Four of the squid-like machines were approaching us, dragging a blanket of newly harvested skin between them, one robot grasping each corner between two segmented silver tentacles. They were moving faster than we could swim, driven by some propulsion system jetting fluid from the sharp ends of their cone-shaped bodies.</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis jerked back as the outer airlock door opened suddenly.</div>
<div class="tx">“I didn’t . . .” she started.</div>
<div class="tx">“I know,” I said urgently. “The robots are coming. They must have sent a command to open the lock.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Let’s get out of the way,” Martinez said, kicking off from the wall. “Ingrid—get away from the lock. Take what you can, but make it snappy.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis started unplugging her equipment, stowing it on her belt with fumbling fingers. The machines powered nearer, the blanket of skin undulating between them like a flying carpet. They slowed, then halted, their lights pushing spears of harsh illumination through the fluid. They were looking at us, wondering what we were doing between them and the door. One of the machines directed its beam towards Martinez’s swimming figure, attracted by the movement. Martinez slowed and hung frozen in the glare, like a moth pinned in a beam of sunlight.</div>
<div class="tx">None of us said a word. My own breathing was the loudest sound in the universe, but I couldn’t make it any quieter. Silently, the airlock door closed itself again, as if the robots had detected our presence and decided to bar our exit from the flooded chamber.</div>
<div class="tx">One of the machines let go of its corner of the skin. It hovered by the sheet for a moment, as if weighing its options. Then it singled me out and commenced its approach. As it neared, the machine appeared far larger and more threatening than I’d expected. Its cone-shaped body was as long as  me; its thickest tentacle appearing powerful enough to do serious damage even without the additional weapon of the laser. When it spread its arms wide, as if to embrace me, I had to fight not to panic and back away.</div>
<div class="tx">The robot started examining me. It began with my helmet, tap-tapping and scraping, shining its light through my visor. It applied twisting force, trying to disengage the helmet from the neck coupling. Whether it recognised me as a person or just a piece of unidentifiable floating debris, it appeared to think that dismantling was the best course of action. I told myself that I’d let it work at me for another few seconds, but as soon as I felt the helmet begin to loosen I’d have to act . . . even if that meant alerting the robot that I probably wasn’t debris.</div>
<div class="tx">But just when I’d decided I had to move, the robot abandoned my helmet and worked its way south. It extended a pair of tentacles under my chest armour from each side, trying to lever it away like a huge scab. Somehow I kept my nerve, daring to believe that the robot would sooner or later lose interest in me. Then it pulled away from the chest armour and started fiddling with my weapon, tap-tapping away like a spirit in a seance. It tugged on the gun, trying to unclip it. Then, as abruptly as it had started, the robot abandoned its investigation. It pulled away, gathering its tentacles into a fistlike bunch. Then it moved slowly in the direction of Nicolosi, tentacles groping ahead of it.</div>
<div class="tx">I willed him to stay still. There’d be no point in trying to swim away. None of us could move faster than those robots. Nicolosi must have worked that out for himself, or else he was paralysed with fright, but he made no movements as the robot cruised up to him. It slowed, the spread of its tentacles widening, and then tracked its spotlight from head to toe, as if it still couldn’t decide what Nicolosi was. Then it reached out a pair of manipulators and brushed their sharp-looking tips against his helmet. The machine probed and examined with surprising gentleness. I heard the metal-on-metal scrape through the voice link, back-grounded by Nicolosi’s rapid, sawlike breathing.</div>
<div class="tx"><i>Keep it together . . .</i></div>
<div class="tx">The machine reached his neck, examined the interface between helmet and torso assembly and then worked its way down to his chest armour, extending a fine tentacle under the armour itself, to where the vulnerable life-support module lay concealed. Then, very slowly, it withdrew the tentacle.</div>
<div class="tx">The machine pulled back from Nicolosi, turning its blunt end away, apparently finished with its examination. The other three robots hovered watchfully with their prize of skin. Nicolosi sighed and eased his breathing.</div>
<div class="tx">“I think . . .” he whispered.</div>
<div class="tx">That was his big mistake. The machine righted itself, gathered its tentacles back into formation and began to approach him again, its powerful light sweeping up and down his body with renewed purpose. The second machine was nearing, clearly intent on assisting its partner in the examination of Nicolosi.</div>
<div class="tx">I looked at Sollis, our horrified gazes locking. “Can you get the door—” I started.</div>
<div class="tx">“Not a hope in hell.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Nicolosi,” I said, not bothering to whisper this time, “stay still and maybe they’ll go away again.”</div>
<div class="tx">But he wasn’t going to stay still: not this time. Even as I watched, he was hooking a hand around the plasma rifle, swinging it in front of him like a harpoon, its wide maw directed at the nearest machine.</div>
<div class="tx">“No!” Norbert shouted, his voice booming through the water like a depth charge. “Do not use! Not in here!”</div>
<div class="tx">But Nicolosi was beyond reasoned argument now. He had a weapon. Every cell in his body was screaming at him to use it.</div>
<div class="tx">So he did.</div>
<div class="tx">In one sense, it did all that he asked of it. The plasma discharge speared the robot like a sunbeam through a cloud. The robot came apart in a boiling eruption of steam and fire, jagged black pieces riding the shock wave. Then the steam—the vaporised amniotic fluid—swallowed everything, including Nicolosi and his gun. Even inside my suit, the sound hit me like a hammer blow. He fired once more, as if to make certain that he had destroyed the robot. By  then the second machine was near enough to be flung back by the blast, but it quickly righted itself and continued its progress towards him.</div>
<div class="tx">“More,” Norbert said, and when I looked back towards the stack of skin sheets, I saw what he meant. Robots were arriving in ones and twos, abandoning their cutting work to investigate whatever had just happened.</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re in trouble,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">The steam cloud was breaking up, revealing the floating form of Nicolosi, the ruined stump of his weapon drifting away from him. The second time he fired it, something must have gone badly wrong with the plasma rifle. I wasn’t even sure that Nicolosi was still alive.</div>
<div class="tx">“I take door,” Norbert said, drawing his Demarchist weapon. “You take robots.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re going to shoot us a way out, after what just happened to Nicolosi?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“No choice,” he said as the gun unpacked itself in his hand.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez pushed himself across to the big man. “No. Give it to me instead. I’ll take care of the door.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Too dangerous,” Norbert said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Give it to me.”</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert hesitated, and for a moment I thought he was going to put up a fight. Then he calmly passed the Demarchist weapon to Martinez and accepted Martinez’s weapon in return, the little slug-gun vanishing into his vast gauntleted hand. Whatever respect I’d had for Norbert vanished at the same time. If he was supposed to be protecting Martinez, that was no way to go about it.</div>
<div class="tx">Of the three of us, only Norbert and I were carrying projectile weapons. I unclipped my second pistol and passed it to Sollis. She took it gratefully, needing little persuasion to keep her energy weapon glued to her belt. The robots were easy to kill, provided we let them get close enough for a clean shot. I didn’t doubt that the surgical cutting gear was capable of inflicting harm, but we never gave them the opportunity to touch us. Not that the machines appeared to have deliberately hostile designs on us anyway. They were  still behaving as if they were investigating some shipboard malfunction that required remedial action. They might have killed us, but it would only have been because they did not understand what we were.</div>
<div class="tx">We didn’t have an inexhaustible supply of slugs, though, and manual reloading was not an option underwater. Just when I began to worry that we’d be overwhelmed by sheer numbers, Martinez’s voice boomed through my helmet.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m ready to shoot now. Follow me as soon as I’m through the second door.”</div>
<div class="tx">The Demarchist weapon discharged, lighting up the entire chamber in an eyeblink of murky detail. There was another discharge, then a third.</div>
<div class="tx">“Martinez,” I said. “Speak to me.”</div>
<div class="tx">After too long a delay, he came through. “I’m still here. Through the first door. Weapon’s cycling . . .”</div>
<div class="tx">More robots were swarming above us, tentacles lashing like whips. I wondered how long it would take before signals reached <i>Nightingale’</i>s sentience engine and the ship realised that it was dealing with more than just a local malfunction.</div>
<div class="tx">“Why doesn’t he shoot?” Sollis asked, squeezing off one controlled slug after another.</div>
<div class="tx">“Sporting weapon. Three shots, recharge cycle, three shots,” Norbert said, by way of explanation. “No rapid-fire mode. But work good underwater.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We could use those next three shots,” I said.</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez buzzed in my ear. “Ready. I will discharge until the weapon is dry. I suggest you start swimming now.”</div>
<div class="tx">I looked at Nicolosi’s drifting form, which was still as inert as when he had emerged from the steam cloud caused by his own weapon. “I think he’s dead,” I said softly, “but we should still—”</div>
<div class="tx">“No,” Norbert said, almost angrily. “Leave him.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe he’s just unconscious.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez fired three times; three brief, bright strobe flashes. “Through!” I heard him call, but there was something wrong with his voice. I knew then that he’d been hurt as well, although I couldn’t guess how badly.</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert and Sollis fired two last shots at the robots that were still approaching, then kicked past me in the direction of the airlock. I looked at Nicolosi’s drifting form, knowing that I’d never be able to live with myself if I didn’t try to get him out of there. I clipped my gun back to my belt and started swimming for him.</div>
<div class="tx">“No!” Norbert shouted again, when he’d seen my intentions. “Leave him! Too late!”</div>
<div class="tx">I reached Nicolosi and locked my right arm around his neck, pulling his head against my chest. I kicked for all I was worth, trying to pull myself forward with my free arm. I still couldn’t tell if Nicolosi was dead or alive.</div>
<div class="tx">“Leave him, Scarrow! Too late!”</div>
<div class="tx">“I can’t leave him!” I shouted back, my voice ragged.</div>
<div class="tx">Three robots were bearing down on me and my cargo, their tentacles groping ahead of them. I squinted against the glare from their lights and tried to focus on getting the two of us to safety. Every kick of my legs, every awkward swing of my arm, seemed to tap the last drop of energy in my muscles. Finally I had nothing more to give.</div>
<div class="tx">I loosened my arm. His body corkscrewed slowly around, and through his visor I saw his face: pale, sweat-beaded, locked into a rictus of fear, but not dead, nor even unconscious. His eyes were wide open. He knew exactly what was going to happen when I let him go.</div>
<div class="tx">I had no choice.</div>
<div class="tx">A strong arm hooked itself under my helmet and began to tug me out of harm’s way. I watched as Nicolosi drifted towards the robots, and then closed my eyes as they wrapped their tentacles around his body and started probing him for points of weakness, like children trying to tear the wrapping from a present.</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert’s voice boomed through the water. “He’s dead.”</div>
<div class="tx">“He was alive. I saw it.”</div>
<div class="tx">“He’s dead. End of story.”</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">I pulled myself through a curtain of trembling pink water. Air pressure in the corridor contained the amniotic fluid, even though Martinez had blown a man-sized hole in each  airlock door. Ruptured metal folded back in jagged black petals. Ahead, caught in a moving pool of light from their helmet lamps, Sollis and Martinez made awkward, crabwise progress away from the ruined door. Sollis was supporting Martinez, doing most of the work for him. Even in zero gravity, it took effort to haul another body.</div>
<div class="tx">“Help her,” Norbert said faintly, shaking his weapon to loosen the last of the pink bubbles from its metal outer casing. Without waiting for a reaction from me, he turned and started shooting back into the water, dealing with the remaining robots.</div>
<div class="tx">I caught up with Sollis and took some of her burden. All along the corridor, panels were flashing bright red, synchronised with the banshee wail of an emergency siren. About once every ten metres, the ship’s persona spoke from the wall, multiple voices blurring into an agitated chorus. “Attention. Attention,” the faces said. “This is the Voice of <i>Nightingale.</i>  An incident has been detected in Culture Bay Three. Damage assessment and mitigation systems have now been tasked. Partial evacuation of the affected ship area may be necessary. Please stand by for further instructions. Attention. Attention . . .”</div>
<div class="tx">“What’s up with Martinez?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Took some shrapnel when he put a hole in that door.” She indicated a severe dent in his chest armour, to the left of the sternum. “Didn’t puncture the suit, but I’m pretty sure it did some damage. Broken rib, maybe even a collapsed lung. He was talking for a while back there, but he’s out cold now.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Without Martinez, we don’t have a mission.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I didn’t say he was dead. His suit still looks as if it’s ticking over. Maybe we could leave him here, collect him on the way back.”</div>
<div class="tx">“With all those robots crawling about the place? How long do you think they’d leave him alone?”</div>
<div class="tx">I looked back, checking on Norbert. He was firing less frequently now, dealing with the last few stragglers still intent on investigating the damage. Finally he stopped, loaded a fresh clip into his slug-gun, and then after waiting  for ten or twenty seconds turned from the wall of water. He began to make his way towards us.</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe there aren’t going to be any more robots.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There will,” Norbert said, joining us. “Many more. Nowhere safe, now. Ship on full alert. <i>Nightingale</i> coming alive.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe we should scrub,” I said. “We’ve lost Nicolosi . . . Martinez is incapacitated . . . we’re no longer at anything like necessary strength to take down Jax.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We still take Jax,” Norbert said. “Came for him, leave with him.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What about Martinez?”</div>
<div class="tx">He looked at the injured man, his face set like a granite carving. “He stay,” he said.</div>
<div class="tx">“But you already said that the robots—”</div>
<div class="tx">“No other choice. He stay.” And then Norbert brought himself closer to Martinez and tucked a thick finger under the chin of the old man’s helmet, tilting the faceplate up. “Wake!” he bellowed.</div>
<div class="tx">When there was no response, Norbert reached behind Martinez’s chest armour and found the release buckles. He passed the dented plate to me, then slid down the access panel on the front of Martinez’s tabard pack, itself dented and cracked from the shrapnel impact. He scooped out a fistful of pink water, flinging the bubble away from us, then started making manual adjustments to the suit’s life-support settings. Biomedical data patterns shifted, accompanied by warning flashes in red.</div>
<div class="tx">“What are you doing?” I breathed. When he didn’t appear to hear me, I shouted the question again.</div>
<div class="tx">“He need stay awake. This help.”</div>
<div class="tx">Martinez coughed red sputum onto the inside of his faceplate. He gulped in hard, then made rapid eye contact with the three of us. Norbert pushed the loaded slug-gun into Martinez’s hand, then slipped a fresh ammo clip onto the old man’s belt. He pointed down the corridor, to the blasted door, then indicated the direction we’d all be heading when we abandoned Martinez.</div>
<div class="tx">“We come back,” he said. “You stay alive.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis’s teeth flashed behind her faceplate. “This isn’t right. We should be carrying him . . . anything other than just leaving him here.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Tell them,” Martinez wheezed.</div>
<div class="tx">“No,” Norbert said.</div>
<div class="tx">“Tell them, you fool! They’ll never trust you unless you tell them.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Tell them what?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert looked at me with heavy-lidded eyes. “The old man . . . not Martinez. His name . . . Quinlan.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then who the fuck is Martinez?” Sollis asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“I,” Norbert said.</div>
<div class="tx">I glanced at Sollis, then back at the big man. “Don’t be silly,” I said gently, wondering what must have happened to him in the flooded chamber.</div>
<div class="tx">“I am Quinlan,” the old man said, between racking coughs. “He was always the master. I was just the servant, the decoy.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re both insane,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">“This is the truth. I acted the role of Martinez . . . deflected attention from him.”</div>
<div class="tx">“He can’t be Martinez,” Sollis said. “Sorry, Norbert, but you can barely put a sentence together, let alone a prosecution dossier.”</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert tapped a huge finger against the side of his helmet. “Damage to speech centre, in war. Comprehension . . . memory . . . analytic faculties . . . intact.”</div>
<div class="tx">“He’s telling the truth,” the old man said. “He’s the one who needs to survive, not me. He’s the one who can nail Jax.” Then he tapped the gun against the big man’s leg, urging him to leave. “Go,” he said, barking out that one word as if it was the last thing he expected to say. And at almost the same moment, I saw one of the tentacled robots begin to poke its limbs through the curtain of water, tick-ticking the tips of its arms against the blasted metal, searching for a way into the corridor.</div>
<div class="tx">“Think the man has a point,” Sollis said.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">It didn’t get any easier after that.</div>
<div class="tx">We left the old man—I still couldn’t think of him as  “Quinlan”—slumped against the corridor wall, the barrel of his gun wavering in the rough direction of the ruined airlock. I looked back all the while, willing him to make the best use of the limited number of shots he had left. We were halfway to the next airlock when he squeezed off three rapid rounds, blasting the robot into twitching pieces. It wasn’t long before another set of tentacles began to probe the gap. I wondered how many of the damned things the ship was going to keep throwing at us, and how that number stacked up against the slugs the old man had left.</div>
<div class="tx">The flashing red lights ran all the way to the end of the corridor. I was just looking at the door, wondering how easy it was going to be for Sollis to crack, when Norbert/Martinez brought the three of us to a halt, braking my forward momentum with one tree-like forearm.</div>
<div class="tx">“Blast visor down, Scarrow.”</div>
<div class="tx">I understood what he had in mind. No more sweet-talking the doors until they opened for us. From now on we’d be shooting our way through <i>Nightingale.</i></div>
<div class="tx">Norbert/Martinez aimed the Demarchist weapon at the airlock. I cuffed down my blast visor. Three discharges took out the first airlock door, crumpling it inward as if punched by a giant fist.</div>
<div class="tx">“Air on other side,” Norbert/Martinez said.</div>
<div class="tx">The Demarchist gun was soon ready again. Through the visor’s near-opaque screen I saw three more flashes. When I flipped it back up, the weapon was packing itself back into its stowed configuration. Sollis patted aside smoke and airborne debris. The emergency lights were still flashing in our section of corridor, but the space beyond the airlock was as pitch dark as any part of the ship we’d already traversed. Yet we’d barely taken a step into that darkness when wall facets lit up in swift sequence, with the face of <i>Nightingale</i> looking at us from all directions.</div>
<div class="tx">Something was definitely wrong now. The faces really were looking at us, even though the facets were flat. The images turned slowly as we advanced along the corridor.</div>
<div class="tx">“This is the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i>,” the faces said simultaneously, as if we were being serenaded by a perfectly  synchronised choir. “I am now addressing a moving party of three individuals. My systems have determined with a high statistical likelihood that this party is responsible for the damage I have recently sustained. The damage is containable, but I cannot tolerate any deeper intrusion. Please remain stationary and await escort to a safe holding area.”</div>
<div class="tx">Sollis slowed, but she didn’t stop. “Who’s speaking? Are we being addressed by the sentience engine, or just a delta-level subsidiary?”</div>
<div class="tx">“This is the Voice of <i>Nightingale.</i>  I am a Turing-compliant gamma-level intelligence of the Vaaler-Lako series. Please stop and await escort to a safe holding area.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s the sentience engine,” Sollis said quietly. “It means we’re getting the ship’s full attention now.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe we can talk it into handing over Jax.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know. Negotiating with this thing might be tricky. Vaaler-Lakos were supposed to be the hot new thing around the time <i>Nightingale</i> was put together, but they didn’t quite work out that way.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What happened?”</div>
<div class="tx">“There was a flaw in their architecture. Within a few years of start-up, most of them had gone bugfuck insane. I don’t even want to think about what being stuck out here’s done to this one.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Please stop,” the voice said again, “and await escort to a safe holding area. This is your final warning.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Ask it . . .” Norbert/Martinez said. “Speak for me.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Can you hear me, ship?” Sollis asked. “We’re not here to do any harm. We’re sorry about the damage we’ve already caused. We’ve come for someone . . . There’s a man here, a man aboard you, that we’d really like to meet.”</div>
<div class="tx">The ship said nothing for several moments. Just when I’d concluded that it didn’t understand us, it said, “This facility is no longer operational. There is no one here for you to see. Please await escort to a safe holding area, from where you can be referred to a functioning facility.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We’ve come for Colonel Jax,” I said. “Check your patient records.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Admission code Tango Tango six one three, hyphen  five,” said Norbert/Martinez, forcing each word out like an expression of pain. “Colonel Brandon Jax, Northern Coalition.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Do you have a record of that admission?” I asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Yes,” the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i> replied. “I have a record for Colonel Jax.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Do you have a discharge record?”</div>
<div class="tx">“No such record is on file.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then Jax either died in your care, or he’s still aboard. Either way there’ll be a body. We’d really like to see it.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That is not possible. You will stop now. An escort is on its way to escort you to a safe holding area.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Why can’t we see Jax?” Sollis demanded. “Is he telling you we can’t see him? If so, he’s not the man you should be listening to. He’s a war criminal, a murderous bastard who deserves to die.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Colonel Jax is under the care of this facility. He is still receiving treatment. It is not possible to visit him at this time.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Damn thing’s changing its story,” I said. “A minute ago it said the facility was closed.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We just want to talk to him,” Sollis said, “that’s all. Just to tell him that the world knows where he is, even if you don’t let us take him with us now.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Please remain calm. The escort is about to arrive.”</div>
<div class="tx">The facets turned to look away from us, peering into the dark limits of the corridor. There was a sudden bustle of approaching movement, and then a wall of machines came squirming towards us. Dozens of squid-robots were nearing, packed so tightly together that their tentacles formed a flailing mass of silver-blue metal. I looked back the other way, back the way we’d come, and saw another wave of robots coming from that direction. There were far more machines than we’d seen before, and their movements in dry air were at least as fast and fluid as they’d been underwater.</div>
<div class="tx">“Ship,” Sollis said, “all we want is Jax. We’re prepared to fight for him. That’ll mean more damage being inflicted on you. But if you give us Jax, we’ll leave nicely.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t think it wants to bargain,” I said, raising my  slug-gun at the advancing wall just as it reached the ruined airlock. I squeezed off rounds, taking out at least one robot with each slug. Sollis started pitching in to my left, while Norbert/Martinez took care of the other direction with the Demarchist weapon. He could do a lot more damage with each discharge, taking out three or four machines every time he squeezed the trigger. But he kept having to wait for the weapon to re-arm itself, and the delay was allowing the wall of hostiles to creep slowly forwards. Sollis and I were firing almost constantly, taking turns to cover each other while we slipped in new slug clips or ammo cells, but our wall was gaining on us as well. No matter how many robots we destroyed, no gap ever appeared in the advancing wave. There must have been hundreds of them, squeezing us in from both directions.</div>
<div class="tx">“We’re not going to make it,” I said, sounding resigned even to myself. “There’s too many of them. Maybe if we still had Nicolosi’s rifle, we could shoot our way out.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I didn’t come all this way just to surrender to a haunted hospital,” Sollis said, replacing an ammo cell in her energy weapon. “If it means going out fighting . . . so be it.”</div>
<div class="tx">The nearest robots were now only six or seven metres away, the tips of their tentacles probing even nearer. She kept pumping shots into them, but they kept coming closer, flinging aside the hot debris of their damaged companions. There was no possibility of falling back any further, for we were almost back to back with Norbert/Martinez.</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe we should just stop,” I said. “This is a hospital. It’s programmed to heal people. The last thing it’ll want to do is hurt us.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Feel free to put that to the test,” Sollis said.</div>
<div class="tx">Norbert/Martinez squeezed off the last discharge before his weapon went back into recharge mode. Sollis was still firing. I reached over and tried to pass Norbert/Martinez my gun, so he’d at least have something to use while waiting for his weapon to power up. But the machines had already seen their moment. The closest one flicked out a tentacle and wrapped it around the big man’s foot. Everything happened very quickly, then. The machine hauled  Norbert/Martinez towards the flailing mass until he fell within reach of another set of tentacles. They had him, then. He cartwheeled his arms, trying to reach for hand-holds on the walls, but there was no possibility of that. The robots flicked the Demarchist weapon from his grip and then took the weapon with them. Norbert/Martinez screamed as his legs, and then his upper body, vanished into the wall of machines. They smothered him completely. For a moment we could still hear his breathing—he’d stopped screaming, as if knowing it would make no difference—and then there was absolute silence, as if the carrier signal from his suit had been abruptly terminated.</div>
<div class="tx">Then, a moment later, the machines were on Sollis and me.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">I woke. The fact that I was still alive—not just alive but comfortable and lucid—hit like me like a mild electric shock, one that snapped me into instant and slightly resentful alertness. I’d been enjoying unconsciousness. I remembered the robots, how I’d felt them trying to get into my suit, the sharp cold nick as something pierced my skin, and then an instant later the painless bliss of sleep. I’d expected to die, but as the drug hit my brain, it erased all trace of fear.</div>
<div class="tx">But I wasn’t dead. I wasn’t even injured, so far as I could tell. I’d been divested of my suit, but was now reclining in relative comfort on a bed or mattress, under a clean white sheet. My own weight was pressing me down onto the mattress, so I must have been moved into the ship’s reactivated centrifuge section. I felt tired and bruised, but other than that I was in no worse shape than when we’d boarded <i>Nightingale.</i>  I remembered what I’d told Sollis during our last stand: how the hospital ship wouldn’t want to do us harm. Maybe there’d been more than just wishful thinking in that statement.</div>
<div class="tx">There was no sign of Sollis or Norbert/Martinez, though. I was alone in a private recovery cubicle, surrounded by white walls. I remembered coming around in a room like this during my first visit to <i>Nightingale.</i>  The wall on my right contained a white-rimmed door and a series of discrete hatches,  behind which I knew lurked medical monitoring and resuscitation equipment, none of which had been deemed necessary in my case. A control panel was connected to the side of the bed by a flexible stalk, within easy reach of my right hand. Via the touchpads on the panel I was able to adjust the cubicle’s environmental settings and request services from the hospital, ranging from food and drink, washing and toilet amenities, to additional drug dosages.</div>
<div class="tx">Given the semi-dormant state of the ship, I wondered how much of it was still online. I touched one of the pads, causing the white walls to melt away and take on the holographic semblance of a calming beach scene, with ocean breakers crashing onto powdery white sand under a sky etched with sunset fire. Palm trees nodded in a soothing breeze. I didn’t care about the view, though. I wanted something to drink—my throat was raw—and then I wanted to know what had happened to the others and how long we were going to be detained. Because, like it or not, being a patient aboard a facility like <i>Nightingale</i> wasn’t very different from being a prisoner. Until the hospital deemed you fit and well, you were going nowhere.</div>
<div class="tx">But when I touched the other pads, nothing happened. Either the room was malfunctioning, or it had been programmed to ignore my requests. I made a move to ease myself off the bed, wincing as my bruised limbs registered their disapproval. But the clean white sheet stiffened to resist my efforts, hardening until it felt as rigid as armour. As soon as I relaxed, the sheet relinquished its hold. I was free to move around on the bed, to sit up and reach for things, but the sheet would not allow me to leave the bed itself.</div>
<div class="tx">Movement caught my eye, far beyond the foot of the bed. A figure walked towards me, strolling along the holographic shoreline. She was dressed almost entirely in black, with a skirt that reached all the way to the sand, heavy fabric barely moving as she approached. She wore a white bonnet over black hair parted exactly in the middle, a white collar and a jewelled clasp at her throat. Her face was instantly recognisable as the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i>, but now it appeared softer, more human.</div>
<div class="tx">She stepped from the wall and appeared to stand at the foot of my bed. She looked at me for a moment before speaking, her expression one of gentle concern.</div>
<div class="tx">“I knew you’d come, given time.”</div>
<div class="tx">“How are the others? Are they okay?”</div>
<div class="tx">“If you are speaking of the two who were with you before you lost consciousness, they are both well. The other two required more serious medical intervention, but they are now both stable.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I thought Nicolosi and Quinlan were dead.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then you underestimated my abilities. I am only sorry that they came to harm. Despite my best efforts, there is a necessary degree of autonomy amongst my machines that sometimes results in them acting foolishly.”</div>
<div class="tx">There was a kindness there that had been entirely absent from the display facets. For the first time I had the impression of an actual mind lurking behind the machine-generated mask. I sensed that it was a mind capable of compassion and complexity of thought.</div>
<div class="tx">“We didn’t intend to hurt you,” I said. “I’m sorry about any damage we caused, but we only ever wanted Jax, your patient. He committed serious crimes. He needs to be brought back to Sky’s Edge, to face justice.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Is that why you risked so much? In the interests of justice?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yes,” I answered.</div>
<div class="tx">“Then you must be very brave and selfless. Or was justice only part of your motivation?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Jax is a bad man. All you have to do is hand him over.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I cannot let you take Jax. He remains my patient.”</div>
<div class="tx">I shook my head. “He <i>was</i> your patient, when he came aboard. But that was during the war. We have a record of his injuries. They were serious, but not life-threatening. Given your resources, it shouldn’t have been too difficult for you to put him back together again. There’s no question of Jax still needing your care.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Shouldn’t I be the judge of that?”</div>
<div class="tx">“No. It’s simple: either Jax died under your care, or he’s well enough to face trial. Did he die?”</div>
<div class="tx">“No. His injuries were, as you note, not life-threatening.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then he’s either alive, or you’ve got him frozen. Either way, you can hand him over. Nicolosi knows how to thaw him out, if that’s what you’re worried about.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There is no need to thaw Colonel Jax. He is alive and conscious, except when I permit him to sleep.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then there’s even less reason not to hand him over.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m afraid there is every reason in the world. Please forget about Colonel Jax. I will not relinquish him from my care.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Not good enough, ship.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You are in my care now. As you have already discovered, I will not permit you to leave against my will. But I will allow you to depart if you renounce your intentions concerning Colonel Jax.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re a gamma-level persona,” I said. “To all intents and purposes you have human intelligence. That means you’re capable of reasoned negotiation.”</div>
<div class="tx">The Voice of <i>Nightingale</i> cocked her head, as if listening to a faraway tune. “Continue.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We came to arrest Colonel Jax. Failing that, we came to find physical proof of his presence aboard this facility. A blood sample, a tissue scraping: something we can take back to the planetary authorities and alert them to his presence here. We won’t get paid as much for that, but at least they can send out a heavier ship and take him by force. But there’s another option, too. If you let us off this ship without even showing us the colonel, there’s nothing to stop us planting a few limpet mines on your hull and blowing you to pieces.”</div>
<div class="tx">The Voice’s face registered disapproval. “So now you resort to threats of physical violence.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m not threatening anything: just pointing out the options. I know you care about self-preservation: it’s wired deep into your architecture.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I would be well advised to kill you now, in that case.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That wouldn’t work. Do you think Martinez kept your coordinates to himself? He always knew this was a risky extraction. He’d have made damn sure another party knew of your whereabouts, and who you were likely to be sheltering.  If we don’t make it back, someone will come in our place. And you can bet they’ll bring their own limpet mines as well.”</div>
<div class="tx">“In which case I would gain nothing by letting you go, either.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No, you’ll get to stay alive. Just give us Jax, and we’ll leave you alone. I don’t know what you’re doing out here, what keeps you sane, but really, it’s your business, not ours. We just want the colonel.”</div>
<div class="tx">The ship’s persona regarded me with narrowed, playful eyes. I had the impression she was thinking things through very carefully indeed, examining my proposition from every conceivable angle.</div>
<div class="tx">“It would be that simple?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Absolutely. We take the man, we say goodbye and you never hear from us again.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’ve invested a lot of time and energy in the colonel. I would find it difficult to part company with him.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re a resourceful persona. I’m sure you’d find other ways to occupy your time.”</div>
<div class="tx">“It isn’t about occupying my time, Dexia.” She’d spoken my name for the first time. Of course she knew who I was: it would only have taken a blood or tissue sample to establish that I’d already been aboard the ship. “It’s about making my feelings felt,” she continued. “Something happened to me around Sky’s Edge. Call it a moment of clarity. I saw the horrors of war for what they were. I also saw my part in the self-perpetuation of those horrors. I had to do something about that. Removing myself from the sphere of operation was one thing, but I knew there was more that I could do. Thankfully, the colonel gave me the key. Through him, I saw a path to redemption.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You didn’t have to redeem yourself,” I said. “You were a force for good, <i>Nightingale.</i>  You healed people.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Only so they could go back to war. Only so they could be blown apart and returned to me for more healing.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You had no choice. It was what you were made to do.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Precisely.”</div>
<div class="tx">“The war’s over. It’s time to forget about what happened.  That’s why it’s so important to bring Jax back home, so that we can start burying the past.”</div>
<div class="tx">The Voice studied me with a level, clinical eye. It was as if she knew something unspeakable about my condition, some truth I was as yet too weak to bear.</div>
<div class="tx">“What would be the likely sentence, were Jax to be tried?”</div>
<div class="tx">“He’d get the death penalty, no question about it. Crucifixion at the Bridgetop, like Sky Haussmann.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Would you mourn him?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Hell, no. I’d be cheering with the rest of them.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then you would agree that his death is inevitable, one way or another.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I guess so.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then I will make a counter-proposition. I will not permit you to take Jax alive. But I will allow you an audience with him. You shall meet and speak with the colonel.”</div>
<div class="tx">Wary of a trap, I asked, “Then what happens?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Once the audience is complete, I will remove the colonel from life support. He will die shortly afterwards.”</div>
<div class="tx">“If you’re willing to let him die . . . why not just hand him over?”</div>
<div class="tx">“He can’t be handed over. Not any more. He would die.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Why?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Because of what I have done to him.”</div>
<div class="tx">Fatigue tugged at me, fogging my earlier clarity of thought. On one level I just wanted to get out of the ship, with no additional complications. I’d expected to die when the hospital sent its machines against us. Yet as glad as I was to find myself alive, as tempted as I was to take the easier option and just leave, I couldn’t ignore the prize that was now so close at hand.</div>
<div class="tx">“I need to talk to the others.”</div>
<div class="tx">“No, Dexia. This must be your decision, and yours alone.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Have you put the same proposition to them?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yes. I told them they could leave now, or they could meet the colonel.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What did they say?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’d rather hear what you have to say first.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m guessing they had the same reaction I did. There’s got to be a catch somewhere.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There is no catch. If you leave now, you will have the personal satisfaction of knowing that you have at least located the colonel, and that he remains alive. Of course, that information may not be worth very much to you, but you would always have the option of returning, should you still wish to bring him to justice. Alternatively, you can see the colonel now—see him and speak with him—and leave knowing he is dead. I will allow you to witness the withdrawal of his life support, and I will even let you take his head with you. That should be worth more than the mere knowledge of his existence.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There’s a catch. I know there’s a catch.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I assure you there isn’t.”</div>
<div class="tx">“We all get to leave? You’re not going to turn around and demand that one of us takes the colonel’s place?”</div>
<div class="tx">“No. You will all be allowed to leave.”</div>
<div class="tx">“In one piece?”</div>
<div class="tx">“In one piece.”</div>
<div class="tx">“All right,” I said, knowing the choice wasn’t going to get any easier no matter how many times I reconsidered it. “I can’t speak for the others . . . and I guess this has to be a majority decision . . . but I’m ready to see the son of a bitch.”</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">I was allowed to leave the room, but not the bed. The sheet tightened against me again, pressing me flat to the mattress as the bed tilted to the vertical. Two squid robots entered the room and detached the bed from its mountings, and then carried it between them. I was glued to it like a figure on a playing card. The robots propelled me forward in an effortless glide, silent save for the soft metallic scratch of their tentacles where they touched the wall or the floor.</div>
<div class="tx">The Voice of <i>Nightingale</i> addressed me from the bedside panel, a small image of her face appearing above the touchpads.</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s not far now, Dexia. I hope you won’t regret your decision.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What about the others?”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’ll be joining them. Then you can all go home.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Are you saying we all made the same decision, to see the colonel?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yes,” the Voice said.</div>
<div class="tx">The robots carried me out of the centrifuge section, into what I judged to be the forward part of the ship. The sheet relinquished its hold on me slightly, just enough so that I was able to move under it. Presently, after passing through a series of air-locks, I was brought to a very dark room. Without being able to see anything, I sensed that this was as large as any pressurised space we’d yet entered, save for the skin-cultivation chamber. The air was as moist and blood-warm as the inside of a tropical greenhouse.</div>
<div class="tx">“I thought you said the others would be here.”</div>
<div class="tx">“They’ll arrive shortly,” the Voice said. “They’ve already met the colonel.”</div>
<div class="tx">“There hasn’t been time.”</div>
<div class="tx">“They met the colonel while you were still asleep, Dexia. You were the last to be revived. Now, would you like to speak to the man himself?”</div>
<div class="tx">I steeled myself. “Yes.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Here he is.”</div>
<div class="tx">A beam of light stabbed across the room, illuminating a face that I recognised instantly. Surrounded by blackness, Jax’s face appeared to hover as if detached from his body. Time had done nothing to soften those pugnacious features; the cruel set of that heavy jaw. Yet his eyes were closed, and his face lolled at a slight angle, as if he remained unaware of the beam.</div>
<div class="tx">“Wake up,” the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i> said, louder than I’d heard her speak so far. “Wake up, Colonel Jax!”</div>
<div class="tx">The colonel woke. He opened his eyes, blinked twice against the glare, then gazed out steadily. He tilted his head to meet the beam, projecting his jaw forward at a challenging angle.</div>
<div class="tx">“You have another visitor, Colonel. Would you like me to introduce her?”</div>
<div class="tx">His mouth opened. Saliva drooled out. From the darkness, a hand descended from above the colonel’s face to wipe his chin dry. Something about the trajectory of the hand’s movement was terribly, terribly wrong. Jax saw my reaction and let out a soft, nasty chuckle. That was when I realised that the colonel was completely, irrevocably insane.</div>
<div class="tx">“Her name is Dexia Scarrow. She’s the last member of the party you’ve already met.”</div>
<div class="tx">Jax spoke. His voice was too loud, as if it was being fed through an amplifier. There was something huge and wet about it. It was like hearing the voice of a whale.</div>
<div class="tx">“You a soldier, girl?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I was a soldier, Colonel. But the war’s over now. I’m a civilian.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Goodee for you. What brought you here, girly girl?”</div>
<div class="tx">“I came to bring you to justice. I came to take you back to the war crimes court on Sky’s Edge.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe you should have come a little sooner.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’ll settle for seeing you die. I understand that’s an option.”</div>
<div class="tx">Something I’d said made the colonel smile. “Has the ship told you the deal yet?”</div>
<div class="tx">“The ship told me she wasn’t letting you out of here alive. She promised us your head.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then I guess she didn’t get into specifics.” He cocked his head away from me, as if talking to someone standing to my left. “Bring up the lights, <i>Nightingale</i>: she may as well know what she’s dealing with.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Are you sure, Colonel?” the ship asked.</div>
<div class="tx">“Bring up the lights. She’s ready.”</div>
<div class="tx">The ship brought up the lights.</div>
<div class="tx">I wasn’t ready.</div>
<div class="tx">For a moment I couldn’t process what I was seeing. My brain just couldn’t cope with the reality of what the ship had done to Colonel Jax, despite the evidence of my eyes. I kept staring at him, waiting for the picture before me to start making sense. I kept waiting for the instant when I’d realise I was being fooled by the play of shadows and light, like a child being scared by a random monster in the folds  of a curtain. But the instant didn’t come. The thing before me was all that it appeared to be.</div>
<div class="tx">Colonel Jax extended in all directions: a quivering expanse of patchwork flesh, of which his head was simply one insignificant component; one hill in a mountain range. He was spread out across the far wall, grafted to it in the form of a vast breathing mosaic. He must have been twenty metres wide, edged with a crinkled circular border of toughened flesh. Under his head was a thick neck, merging into the upper half of an armless torso. I could see the faint scars where the arms had been detached. Below the slow-heaving ribcage, the torso flared out like the melted base of a candle. Another torso rose from the flesh two metres to the colonel’s right. It had no head, but it did have an arm. A second torso loomed over him from behind, equipped with a pair of arms, one of which must have cleaned the colonel’s chin. Further away, emerging from the pool of flesh at odd, arbitrary angles, were other living body parts. A torso here; a pair of legs there; a hip or shoulder somewhere else. The torsos were all breathing, though not in perfect synchronisation. When they were not engaged in some purposeful activity, such as wiping Jax’s chin, the limbs twitched, palsied. The skin between them was an irregular mosaic formed from many ill-matched pieces that had been fused together. In places it was drum-tight, pulled taut over hidden armatures of bone and gristle. In other places it heaved like a stormy sea. It gurgled with hidden digestive processes.</div>
<div class="tx">“You see now why I’m not coming with you,” Colonel Jax said. “Not unless you brought a much bigger ship. Even then, I’m not sure you’d be able to keep me alive very long without <i>Nightingale</i>’s assistance.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re a fucking monstrosity.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m no oil painting, that’s a fact.” Jax tilted his head, as if a thought had just struck him. “I am a work of art, though, wouldn’t you agree, girly girl?”</div>
<div class="tx">“If you say so.”</div>
<div class="tx">“The ship certainly thinks so—don’t you, <i>Nightingale</i>? She made me what I am. It’s her artistic vision shining through. The bitch.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re insane.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Very probably. Do you honestly think you could take one day of this and not go mad? Oh, I’m mad enough, I’ll grant you that. But I’m still sane compared to the ship. Around here, she’s the imperial fucking yardstick for insanity.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Sollis was right, then. Leave a sentience engine like that all alone and it’ll eat itself from the inside out.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe so. Thing is, it wasn’t solitude that did it. <i>Nightingale</i> turned insane long before she ever got out here. And you know what did it? That little war we had ourselves down on Sky’s Edge. They built this ship and put the mind of an angel inside it. A mind dedicated to healing, compassion, kindness. So what if it was a damned machine? It was still designed to care for us, selflessly, day after day. And it turned out to be damned good at its job, too. For a while, at least.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Then you know what happened.”</div>
<div class="tx">“The ship drove herself mad. Two conflicting impulses pushed a wedge through her sanity. She was meant to treat us, to make us well again, to alleviate our pain. But every time she did her job, we were sent back down to the theatre of battle and ripped apart again. The ship took our pain away only so that we could feel it again. She began to feel as if she was complicit in that process: a willing cog in a greater machine whose only purpose was the manufacture of agony. In the end, she decided she didn’t much like being that cog.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So she took off. What happened to all the other patients? ”</div>
<div class="tx">“She killed them. Euthanised them painlessly rather than have them sent back down to battle. To <i>Nightingale</i>, that was the kinder thing to do.”</div>
<div class="tx">“And the technical staff who were aboard, and the men who were sent to reclaim the ship when she went out of control?”</div>
<div class="tx">“They were euthanised as well. I don’t think <i>Nightingale</i> took any pleasure in that, but she saw their deaths as a necessary evil. Above all else, she wouldn’t allow herself to be returned to use as a military hospital.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Yet she didn’t kill you.”</div>
<div class="tx">A dry tongue flicked across Jax’s lips. “She was going to. Then she delved deeper into her patient records and realised who I was. At that point she began to have other ideas.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Such as?”</div>
<div class="tx">“The ship was smart enough to realise that the bigger problem wasn’t her existence—they could always build other hospital ships—but the war itself. <i>War</i> itself. So she decided to do something about it. Something positive. Something constructive.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Which would be?”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re looking at it, kid. I’m the war memorial. When <i>Nightingale</i> started doing this to me—making me what I am—she had in mind that I’d become a vast artistic statement in flesh. <i>Nightingale</i> would reveal me to the world when she was finished. The horror of what I am would shame the world into peace. I’d be the living, breathing equivalent of Picasso’s <i>Guernica.</i>  I’m an illustration in flesh of what war does to human beings.”</div>
<div class="tx">“The war’s over. We don’t need a memorial.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Maybe you can explain that to the ship. Trouble is, I don’t think she really believes the war <i>is</i> over. You can’t blame her, can you? She has access to the same history files we do. She knows that not all ceasefires stay that way.”</div>
<div class="tx">“What was she intending to do? Return to Sky’s Edge with you aboard?”</div>
<div class="tx">“Exactly that. Problem is, the ship isn’t done. I know I may look finished to you, but <i>Nightingale</i>—well, she has this perfectionist streak. She’s always changing her mind. Can’t ever seem to get me quite right. Keeps swapping pieces around, cutting pieces away, growing new parts and stitching them in. All the while she has to make sure I don’t die on her. That’s where her real genius comes in. She’s Michelangelo with a scalpel.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You almost sound proud of what she’s done to you.”</div>
<div class="tx">“Would you rather I screamed? I can scream if you like. It just gets old after a while.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You’re way too far gone, Jax. I was wrong about the war  crimes court. They’ll throw your case out on grounds of insanity.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That would be a shame. I’d love to see their faces when they wheel me into the witness box. But I’m not going to court, am I? Ship’s laid it all out for me. She’s pulling the plug.”</div>
<div class="tx">“So she says.”</div>
<div class="tx">“You don’t sound as if you believe her.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I can’t see her abandoning you, after all the effort she’s gone to.”</div>
<div class="tx">“She’s an artist. They act on whims. Maybe if I was ready, maybe if she thought she’d done all she could with me . . . but that’s not the way she feels. I think she felt she was getting close three or four years ago . . . but then she had a change of heart, a major one, and tore out almost everything. Now I’m an unfinished work. She couldn’t bear to see me exhibited in this state. She’d rather rip up the canvas and start again.”</div>
<div class="tx">“With you?”</div>
<div class="tx">“No, I think she’s more or less exhausted my possibilities. Especially now that she’s seen the chance to do something completely different; something that will let her take her message a lot closer to home. That, of course, is where you come in.”</div>
<div class="tx">“I don’t know what you mean.”</div>
<div class="tx">“That’s what the others said as well.” Again, he cocked his head to one side. “Hey, ship! Maybe it’s time you showed her what the deal is, don’t you think?”</div>
<div class="tx">“If you are ready, Colonel,” the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i> said.</div>
<div class="tx">“I’m ready. Dexia’s ready. Why don’t you bring on the dessert?”</div>
<div class="tx">Colonel Jax looked to the right, straining his neck. Beyond Jax’s border, a circular door opened in part of the wall. Light rammed through the opening. Something floated in silhouette, held in suspension by three or four squid robots. The floating thing was dark, rounded, irregular. It looked like half a dozen pieces of dough balled together. I couldn’t make out what it was.</div>
<div class="tx">Then the robots pushed it into the chamber, and I saw, and then I screamed.</div>
<div class="tx">“It’s time for you to join your friends now,” the ship said.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="tx1">That was three months ago—an eternity, until we remember being held down on the surgical bed while the machines emerged and prepared to work on us, and then it feels as if everything happened only a terror-filled moment ago.</div>
<div class="tx">We made it safely back to Sky’s Edge. The return journey was arduous, as one might expect given our circumstances. But the shuttle had little difficulty flying itself back into a capture orbit, and once it fell within range it emitted a distress signal that brought it to the attention of the planetary authorities. We were off-loaded and taken to a secure orbital holding facility, where we were examined and our story subjected to what limited verification was actually possible. Dexia had bluffed the Voice of <i>Nightingale</i> when she told the ship that Martinez was certain to have revealed the coordinates of the hospital ship to someone else. It turned out that he hadn’t informed a soul, too wary of alerting Jax’s allies. The Ultras who had found the ship in the first place were now a fifth of a light-year away, and falling further from Sky’s Edge with every passing hour. It would be decades, or longer, before they returned this way.</div>
<div class="tx">All the same, we don’t think anyone seriously doubted our story. As outlandish as it was, no one could suggest a more likely alternative. We did have the head of Colonel Brandon Jax, or at least a duplicate that passed all available genetic and physiological tests. And we had clearly been to a place that specialised in extremely advanced surgery, of a kind that simply wasn’t possible in and around Sky’s Edge. That was the problem, though. The planet’s best surgeons had examined us with great thoroughness, each eager to advance their own prestige by undoing the work of <i>Nightingale.</i> But all had quailed, fearful of doing more harm than good. No separation of Siamese twins could compare in complexity and risk with the procedure that would be necessary to unknot the living puzzle <i>Nightingale</i> had made of  us. None of the surgeons was willing to bet on the survival of more than a single one of us, and even the odds of that weren’t overwhelmingly optimistic. That pact we’d made with each other was that we would only consent to the operation if the vote was unanimous.</div>
<div class="tx">At massive expense (not ours, for by then we were the subject of considerable philanthropy), a second craft was sent out to snoop the coordinates where we’d left the hospital ship. It had the best military scanning gear money could buy. But it found nothing out there but ice and dust.</div>
<div class="tx">From that, we were free to draw two possible conclusions. Either <i>Nightingale</i> had destroyed herself soon after our departure, or had relocated to avoid being found again. We couldn’t say which alternative pleased us less. At least if we’d known that the ship was gone for good, we could have resigned ourselves to the surgeons, however risky that might have been. But if the ship was hiding herself, there was always the possibility that someone might find her again. And then somehow persuade her to undo us.</div>
<div class="tx">But perhaps <i>Nightingale</i> will need no persuasion, when she decides the time is right. It seems to us that the ship will return one day, of her own volition. She will make orbit around Sky’s Edge and announce that the time has come for us to be separated. <i>Nightingale</i> will have decided that we have served our purpose, that we have walked the world long enough. Perhaps by then she will have some other memorial in mind. Or she will conclude that her message has finally been taken to heart, and that no further action is needed. That, we think, will depend on how the ceasefire holds.</div>
<div class="tx">It’s in our interests, then, to make sure the planet doesn’t slip back into war. We want the ship to return and heal us. None of us likes things this way, despite what you may have read or heard. Yes, we’re famous. Yes, we’re the subject of a worldwide outpouring of sympathy and goodwill. Yes, we can have almost anything we want. None of that compensates, though. Not even for a second.</div>
<div class="tx">It’s hard on all of us, but especially so for Martinez.  We’ve all long since stopped thinking of the big man as Norbert. He’s the one who has to carry us everywhere: more than twice his own bodyweight. <i>Nightingale</i> thought of that, of course, and made sure that our own hearts and respiratory systems take some of the burden off Martinez. But it’s still his spine bending under this load; still his legs that have to support us. The doctors who’ve examined us say his condition is good, that he can continue to play his part for years to come—but they’re not talking about for ever. And when Martinez dies, so will the rest of us. In the meantime we just keep hoping that <i>Nightingale</i> will return sooner than that.</div>
<div class="tx">You’ve seen us up close now. You’ll have seen photographs and moving images before, but nothing really compares with seeing us in the flesh. We make quite a spectacle, don’t we? A great tottering tree of flesh, an insult to symmetry. You’ve heard us speak, all of us, individually. You know by now how we feel about the war. All of us played our part in it to some degree, some more than others. Some of us were even enemies. Now the very idea that we might have hated each other—hated that which we depend on for life itself—lies beyond all comprehension. If <i>Nightingale</i> sought to create a walking argument for the continuation of the ceasefire, then she surely succeeded.</div>
<div class="tx">We are sorry if some of you will go home to nightmares tonight. We can’t help that. In fact, if truth be told, we’re not sorry at all. Nightmares are what we’re all about. It’s the nightmare of us that will stop this planet falling back into war.</div>
<div class="tx">If you have trouble sleeping tonight, spare <i>us</i> a thought.</div>
</body>
</html>