<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8"/>
<title>Galactic North</title>
<link href="reyn_9780441016006_oeb_css_r1.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<link href="page-template.xpgt" rel="stylesheet" type="application/adobe-page-template+xml"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:60eaa905-6e96-4a49-89d3-db4cba8c398a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<p><a id="cop"/></p>
<div class="crt"><b>THE BERKLEY PUBLISHING GROUP</b> <br/><b>Published by the Penguin Group</b> <br/><b>Penguin Group (USA) Inc.</b> <br/><b>375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA</b> <br/>Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada <br/>(a division of Pearson Penguin Canada Inc.) <br/>Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England <br/>Penguin Group Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.) <br/>Penguin Group (Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia <br/>(a division of Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.) <br/>Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India <br/>Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, North Shore 0632, New Zealand <br/>(a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd.) <br/>Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, <br/>South Africa</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices: 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead, business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental. The publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for author or third-party websites or their content.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">GALACTIC NORTH</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">Originally published by Orion Publishing Group.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">An Ace Book / published by arrangement with Orion Publishing Group</div>
<div> <br/></div>
<div class="crt"><div> <br/></div>Copyright © 2006 by Alastair Reynolds.</div>

<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">All rights reserved. <br/>No part of this book may be reproduced, scanned, or distributed in any printed or electronic form <br/>without permission. Please do not participate in or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials in <br/>violation of the author’s rights. Purchase only authorized editions. <br/>For information, address: Gollancz, <br/>an imprint of Orion Publishing Group, <br/>Orion House, 5 Upper St. Martin’s Lane, <br/>London WC2H 9EA, England.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">eISBN : 978-0-441-01600-6</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt">ACE <br/>Ace Books are published by The Berkley Publishing Group, <br/>a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc., <br/>375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014. <br/>ACE and the “A” design are trademarks belonging to Penguin Group (USA) Inc.</div>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt"/>
<div> <br/></div><div class="crt"/>
<div> <br/></div>
<p class="crt"><a href="http://us.penguingroup.com">http://us.penguingroup.com</a></p>
</body>
</html>