<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title/>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:edfc0d3e-df84-48ed-96a2-8fcd3856a66a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="galley-rw">
<section epub:type="bodymatter chapter" id="copyright">
<h1 class="copyright-title"><a href="toc.xhtml#toc-copyright">Copyright</a></h1>
<p class="copyright-space">This book is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents are the product of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual events, locales, or persons, living or dead, is coincidental.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Copyright © 2019 by Adrian Czajkowski</p>
<p class="copyright">Excerpt from <em>Red Moon</em> copyright © 2018 by Kim Stanley Robinson</p>
<p class="copyright">Excerpt from <em>Rosewater</em> copyright © 2016 by Tade Thompson</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Author photo by Ante Vukorepa</p>
<p class="copyright">Cover images by Shutterstock</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Hachette Book Group supports the right to free expression and the value of copyright. The purpose of copyright is to encourage writers and artists to produce the creative works that enrich our culture.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book without permission is a theft of the author’s intellectual property. If you would like permission to use material from the book (other than for review purposes), please contact permissions@hbgusa.com. Thank you for your support of the author’s rights.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Orbit</p>
<p class="copyright">Hachette Book Group</p>
<p class="copyright">1290 Avenue of the Americas</p>
<p class="copyright">New York, NY 10104</p>
<p class="copyright"><a href="http://www.orbitbooks.net">orbitbooks.net</a></p>
<p class="copyright-space">Simultaneously published in Great Britain by Macmillan and in the U.S. by Orbit in 2019</p>
<p class="copyright">First U.S. Edition: May 2019</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Orbit is an imprint of Hachette Book Group.</p>
<p class="copyright">The Orbit name and logo are trademarks of Little, Brown Book Group Limited.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">The publisher is not responsible for websites (or their content) that are not owned by the publisher.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">The Hachette Speakers Bureau provides a wide range of authors for speaking events. To find out more, go to www.hachettespeakersbureau.com or call (866) 376-6591.</p>
<p class="copyright-space">Library of Congress Control Number: 2019930327</p>
<p class="copyright-space">ISBNs: 978-0-316-45253-3 (trade paperback), 978-0-316-45254-0 (ebook)</p>
<p class="copyright-space">E3-20190420-JV-NF-ORI</p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>