<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=UTF-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>Children Of Ruin</title>
<link href="css/stylesheet.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:edfc0d3e-df84-48ed-96a2-8fcd3856a66a" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="galley-rw">
<section class="frontmatter-rw FrontSales-rw auto-rw page-open-left-rw" epub:type="frontmatter" id="praise">
<h1 class="preface-title"><a href="toc.xhtml#toc-praise">Praise for Adrian Tchaikovsky</a></h1>
<p class="noindent">“A novel of sublime plot twists and spectacular set pieces, all underpinned by great ideas. And it is crisply modern—but with the sensibility of classic science fiction. Asimov or Clarke might have written this. A hugely satisfying sequel.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—Stephen Baxter on <em>Children of Ruin</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“Magnificent. This is the big stuff—the really big stuff. Rich in wisdom and Humanity (note the “H”), with a Stapledonian sweep and grandeur. Books like this are why we read science fiction.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—Ian McDonald on <em>Children of Ruin</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“<em>Children of Ruin</em> is wonderful—big, thinky SF that feels classic without being mired in the past, absolutely crammed with fun ideas. Anyone who likes sweeping, evolutionary-scale stories will love this.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—Django Wexler</p>
<p class="noindent">“A refreshingly new take on post-dystopia civilizations, with the smartest evolutionary world-building you’ll ever read.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—Peter F. Hamilton on <em>Children of Time</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“<em>Children of Time</em> is a joy from start to finish. Entertaining, smart, surprising and unexpectedly human.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—Patrick Ness</p>
<p class="noindent">“Brilliant science fiction and far-out world-building.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—James McAvoy on <em>Children of Time</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“This is superior stuff, tackling big themes—gods, messiahs, artificial intelligence, alienness—with brio.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<em>Financial Times</em> on <em>Children of Time</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“Packed with ingenious ideas… classic widescreen space opera.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<em>New Scientist</em> on <em>Children of Time</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“An enormously interesting and well drawn SF novel that asks some tough questions and makes interesting extrapolations.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<em>SF Signal</em> on <em>Children of Time</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“Tchaikovsky is a phenomenal author, a modern powerhouse of fiction.… Speculative fiction at its best.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<em>Starburst</em> magazine on <em>Dogs of War</em></p>
<p class="noindent">“A timely warning about the dangers of artificial intelligence and super weapons in the hands of unscrupulous powers.”</p>
<p class="attribution">—<em>Guardian</em> on <em>Dogs of War</em></p>
</section>
</div>
</body>
</html>